
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
LBS Research Online
Georgy Chabakauri
Portfolio choice and asset pricing in incomplete markets
Thesis
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/2464/
Chabakauri, Georgy
(2009)
Portfolio choice and asset pricing in incomplete markets.
Doctoral thesis, University of London: London Business School.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.35065/PUB.00002464
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Portfolio Choice and Asset Pricing
in Incomplete Markets
by
Georgy Chabakauri
A dissertation submitted to the University of London
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Department of Finance
London Business School
University of London
c⃝June 2009


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Declaration
Chapter 1 of this Thesis is entirely my own. Chapters 2 and 3 are coauthored with Professor
Suleyman Basak.
Georgy Chabakauri
2


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
I would especially like to thank my advisor Suleyman Basak for extensive discussions, invalu-
able comments and support throughout my course of study at London Business School. I am
also grateful to Mike Chernov, Victor DeMiguel, Francisco Gomes, Christopher Hennessy,
Igor Makarov, Anna Pavlova and Raman Uppal for insightful discussions and comments on
my work.
3


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Abstract
Abstract
This Thesis studies the portfolio choice and asset pricing in economic settings with incom-
plete markets and is comprised of three chapters. Chapter 1 explores the formation of stock
prices in a general equilibrium economy with heterogeneous investors facing portfolio con-
straints. We compute the equilibrium when both investors have (identical for simplicity)
CRRA preferences, one of them is unconstrained while the other faces an upper bound
constraint on the proportion of wealth invested in stocks. We demonstrate that under cer-
tain parameters the model can generate countercyclical stock return volatilities, procyclical
price-dividend ratios, excess volatility and other patterns observed in the data. Our baseline
analysis is also extended to models with heterogeneous beliefs.
Chapter 2 studies the portfolio choice in economies with incomplete markets with in-
vestors guided by mean-variance criteria. Mean-variance criteria remain prevalent in multi-
period problems, and yet not much is known about their dynamically optimal policies. In
this chapter we provide a fully analytical characterization of the optimal dynamic mean-
variance portfolios within a general incomplete-market economy. We solve the problem by
explicitly recognizing the time-inconsistency of the mean-variance criterion and deriving a
recursive representation for it, which makes dynamic programming applicable. A calibration
exercise shows that the mean-variance hedging demands may comprise a signiﬁcant fraction
of the total risky asset demand.
Chapter 3 provides a simple solution to the hedging problem in a general incomplete-
market economy in which a hedger, guided by the minimum-variance criterion, aims at
reducing the risk of a non-tradable asset. We derive fully analytical optimal time-consistent
hedges and demonstrate that they can easily be computed in various stochastic environ-
ments. Our dynamic hedges preserve the simple structure of complete-market perfect hedges
and are in terms of generalized “Greeks,” familiar in risk management applications. We
demonstrate that our optimal hedges typically outperform their static and myopic counter-
parts under plausible economic environments.
4


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Introduction
10
1. Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
14
1.1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2. General Equilibrium with Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.2.1. Economic Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.2.2. Characterization of Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.2.3. Further Properties of Equilibrium
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
1.3. Equilibrium with Proportional Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
1.3.1. Characterization and Computation of Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . .
31
1.3.2. Analysis of Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
1.4. Extensions and Ramiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
1.4.1. Heterogeneous Beliefs Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
1.4.2. Multiple Stock Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
1.5. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
1.6. Appendix A: Proofs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
1.7. Appendix B: Numerical Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
2. Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
69
2.1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
2.2. Asset Allocation with Mean-Variance Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
2.2.1. Economic Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
2.2.2. Determination of Optimal Dynamic Investment Policy . . . . . . . . .
77
2.2.3. Further Properties of Optimal Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Table of Contents
2.2.4. Optimal Pre-commitment Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
2.3. Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
2.3.1. Constant Elasticity of Variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
2.3.2. Stochastic Volatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
2.3.3. Time-Varying Gaussian Mean Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
2.4. Extensions and Ramiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
2.4.1. Discrete-Time Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
2.4.2. Multiple Stock Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
2.4.3. Stochastic Interest Rates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
2.5. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
2.6. Appendix: Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
3. Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
123
3.1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
3.2. Dynamic Minimum-Variance Hedging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
3.2.1. Economic Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
3.2.2. Dynamically Optimal Hedging Policy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
3.2.3. Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
3.2.4. Time-Consistency Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
3.3. Comparison with Pre-commitment, Static and Myopic Hedges . . . . . . . . . 140
3.3.1. Comparison with Pre-commitment Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
3.3.2. Comparison with Static Policy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
3.3.3. Comparison with Myopic Policy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
3.4. Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
6


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Table of Contents
3.4.1. Mean-Variance Hedging and Benchmark Tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . 149
3.4.2. Multi-dimensional case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
3.5. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
3.6. Appendix: Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
References
165
7


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
List of Tables
List of Tables
1.1
Eﬀective Domains and Support Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.1
Percentage Hedging Demand over Total Demand for the Stochastic-
Volatility Model with elasticity β = −1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
2.2
Percentage Mean Hedging Demand over Mean Total Demand for
the Mean-Reverting Gaussian Returns Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
3.1
Optimal Dynamic and Static Hedges and Their Relative Perfor-
mances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
3.2
Dynamically Optimal and Myopic Policies and Their Relative Per-
formances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
8


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
List of Figures
List of Figures
1.1
Parameters of Equilibrium with Constraints, γ < 1. . . . . . . . . . . .
38
1.2
Parameters of Equilibrium with Constraints, γ > 1. . . . . . . . . . . .
40
1.3
Probability Density Functions for Constrained Investor’s Share in
Aggregate Consumption, γ = 3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
1.4
Price-Dividend Ratios and Ratios of Stock Return and Dividend
Growth Volatilities with Heterogeneous Beliefs, γ > 1. . . . . . . . . .
52
3.1
Relative Performance of Dynamically Optimal and Pre-commitment
Hedges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
9


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Introduction
Introduction
The main objective of this Thesis is to study the optimal portfolio choice and asset pric-
ing in ﬁnancial markets with imperfections, such as portfolio constraints or unhedgeable
risks that render the markets incomplete. It is generally admitted that these imperfections
signiﬁcantly contribute towards understanding the investor behavior and the dynamics of
ﬁnancial markets. Despite their importance in Finance, portfolio choice and asset pricing
models are notoriously diﬃcult to solve in incomplete markets. This Thesis develops new
methods for solving these models in various incomplete-market settings and provides new
economic insights into the formation of optimal portfolios and asset prices.
The Thesis
consists of three Chapters that explore diﬀerent aspects of portfolio choice and asset pricing
in incomplete ﬁnancial markets.
Chapter 1 is entitled “Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints” and ex-
plores the formation of asset prices in a pure exchange general equilibrium economy with
two heterogeneous investors facing portfolio constraints, and one consumption good gener-
ated by a Lucas tree. Even though the presence of portfolio constraints is well documented
in the contemporary literature, it is admittedly diﬃcult to incorporate them into general
equilibrium analysis unless constrained investors are logarithmic, as commonly assumed in
the literature. However, the assumption of logarithmic investors signiﬁcantly impedes the
evaluation of the impact of portfolio constraints on ﬁnancial markets. In particular, there
is a large literature (e.g., Detemple and Murthy, 1997; Basak and Cuoco, 1998; Basak and
Croitoru, 2000, 2006) demonstrating that in economic settings with logarithmic investors
various portfolio constraints do not aﬀect stock prices since classical income and substitu-
tion eﬀects perfectly oﬀset each other. In Chapter 1 we develop a methodology that does
not rely on the restrictive assumption of logarithmic investors and therefore allows us to
evaluate the impact of constraints on equilibrium parameters such as interest rates, market
prices of risk, price-dividend ratios and stock return volatilities.
In particular, we numerically compute the equilibrium in a setting with two investors
10


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Introduction
with identical constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility functions where one investor
is unconstrained while the other faces an upper bound constraint on the proportion of
wealth that can be invested in stocks. We compute the equilibrium parameters and study
their behavior in good (when dividend growth shocks are positive) and bad (when dividend
growth shocks are negative) states of the economy. We demonstrate that the impact of
portfolio constraints crucially depends on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES).
When IES is greater than unity our model generates countercyclical market prices of risk
and stock return volatilities and procyclical stock price-dividend ratios (i.e., market prices of
risk and stock return volatilities are higher in bad states and lower in good states, and vice
versa for price-dividend ratios) as well as excess stock return volatility, consistently with the
literature (e.g., Ferson and Harvey, 1991; Schwert, 1989; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999).
Moreover, we demonstrate that our methodology can easily be extended to incorporate
heterogeneous beliefs and multiple assets.
Chapter 2 is entitled “Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation” and studies optimal dy-
namic mean-variance asset allocation in a general incomplete-market economy with stochas-
tic investment opportunity sets. Mean-variance portfolio choice has always been recognized
as the cornerstone of modern portfolio theory, and is still widely employed both in industry
and academia due to its tractability and intuitive appeal (e.g., among others, Ait-Sahalia and
Brandt, 2001; Campbell and Viceira, 2002; Jagannathan and Ma, 2003; Bansal, Dahlquist
and Harvey, 2004; Acharya and Pedersen, 2005; Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong, 2006; Brandt,
2009; Campbell, Serfaty-de Medeiros and Viceira, 2009). The extant literature primarily
solves for optimal mean-variance policies assuming that investors are myopic and maxi-
mize their criterion over the next period, ignoring the hedging demands arising due to the
ﬂuctuations of investment opportunity sets. In contrast with the previous literature, we
study dynamic optimal mean-variance asset allocation via dynamic programming by explic-
itly recognizing the time-inconsistency of mean-variance criteria. While previous literature
has reported diﬃculties in applying dynamic programming to mean-variance criteria due
to the failure of iterated expectations property (see e.g., Zhou and Li, 2000), we provide a
11


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Introduction
recursive representation of the investor’s mean-variance criterion which makes possible the
application of dynamic programming.
To our best knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to obtain closed form expressions for optimal
investment policies in a general incomplete-market setting in terms of exogenous model
parameters and a new hedge-neutral probability measure that facilitates the tractability of
the analysis. We also demonstrate that our dynamically optimal time-consistent policies
are generically diﬀerent from the pre-commitment policies obtained in the literature, from
which an investor may deviate in the future unless being able to pre-commit. Moreover,
methodology presented in Chapter 2 can eﬃciently be applied to study the asset allocation
for various investment opportunity sets, including those endogenously derived in equilibrium
in Chapter 1. Speciﬁcally, in this work we obtain explicit expressions for various stochastic
investment opportunity sets widely used in the literature, such as models with Gaussian
mean-reverting stock returns (e.g., Kim and Omberg, 1996) and models with stochastic
volatility (e.g., Liu, 2005; Chacko and Viceira, 2005). Moreover, the calibration to the real
data reveals the signiﬁcance of the hedging demands, which shows that popular myopic
policies ignore a substantial fraction of the optimal total demand for stocks in a dynamic
setting.
Finally, Chapter 3 entitled “Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple So-
lution” employs the methodology developed in Chapter 2 to study mean-variance hedging
problem in a dynamic incomplete-market economy with stochastic investment opportunity
sets. The investor in this setting hedges the ﬂuctuations of a non-tradable asset by mini-
mizing the variance of the hedging error given by the diﬀerence of the non-tradable asset
payoﬀand tradable wealth at a terminal date. Hedging in incomplete markets is a classical
problem covered in major test books as well as academic works but primary in static or
myopic settings. When the market is incomplete and perfect hedging by means of standard
no-arbitrage methods is no longer feasible the literature derives optimal hedges that maxi-
mize investors’ utility functions or minimize various hedging criteria such as squired hedging
error or hedging error variance. Despite much work in this direction, we still lack tractable
12


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Introduction
dynamically optimal policies.
By employing the methodology of Chapter 2 we provide tractable dynamically opti-
mal hedges in a general incomplete-market economy by employing the minimum-variance
criterion. We demonstrate that our optimal hedges retain the intuitive structure of classi-
cal complete-market hedges and are in terms of generalized “Greeks”, widely used in risk
management applications. We obtain our dynamic time-consistent hedges via dynamic pro-
gramming by explicitly recognizing the time-inconsistency of mean-variance criteria while
previous works (e.g., Duﬃe and Richardson, 1991; Schweizer, 1994; Musiela and Rutkowski,
1998) obtain policies that minimize the variance criterion globally and from which the in-
vestor may choose to optimally deviate in the future. Moreover, we demonstrate that our
hedges typically outperform static and myopic counterparts in plausible economic settings.
13


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
1.
Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
1.1.
Introduction
Portfolio constraints and market frictions have long been considered among key contribu-
tors towards understanding investor behavior and equilibrium asset prices. In particular,
dynamic equilibrium models with heterogeneous investors facing portfolio constraints have
extensively been employed by ﬁnancial economists to confront a wide range of phenomena
such as the equity premium puzzle, mispricing of redundant assets, role of arbitrageurs,
impact of heterogeneous beliefs on asset prices, and stock comovements (e.g., among oth-
ers, Detemple and Murthy, 1997; Basak and Cuoco, 1998; Basak and Croitoru, 2000, 2006;
Kogan, Makarov and Uppal, 2007; Gallmeyer and Holliﬁeld 2008; Pavlova and Rigobon,
2008). However, tractable characterizations of equilibria are only obtained assuming that a
constrained investor has logarithmic preferences which simpliﬁes the analysis at the cost of
assuming investor’s myopia.1 Despite recent developments in portfolio optimization, such
as duality method of Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992), portfolio constraints are notoriously
diﬃcult to incorporate into general equilibrium analysis as well as portfolio choice when
constrained investors have more general preferences inducing hedging demands.
The assumption of logarithmic preferences is not innocuous and impedes the evaluation
of the impact of constraints on stock prices and stock return volatilities. Thus, in economic
settings with two logarithmic investors and single consumption good (e.g., Detemple and
Murthy, 1997; Basak and Cuoco, 1998; Basak and Croitoru, 2000, 2006) stock prices and
hence stock return volatilities are unaﬀected by constraints since the income and substitu-
tion eﬀects perfectly oﬀset each other. When the constrained investor is logarithmic, the
volatility eﬀects of constraints have been studied in speciﬁc settings where the other (un-
1The assumption that one investor has logarithmic preferences is also commonly made for tractability
in models with unconstrained investors who diﬀer in risk aversions. Thus, Dumas (1989) studies dynamic
equilibrium in a production economy, where one investor has logarithmic while the other general CRRA
preferences. Wang (1996) studies an exchange economy where one investor has logarithmic while the other
square-root preferences. One notable exception is Bhamra and Uppal (2009), who study the eﬀect of in-
troducing non-redundant securities on the volatilities of asset returns in an exchange economy with CRRA
investors not restricted to being logarithmic.
14


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
constrained) investor has diﬀerent preferences (e.g., Gallmeyer and Holliﬁeld, 2008), which
requires further justiﬁcation. To our best knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to study the
eﬀect of diﬀerent constraints on stock return volatility in a continuous-time economy with-
out relying on the assumption of logarithmic investors. As a result, our solution method
yields new insights on the impact of portfolio constraints on stock prices and, in particular,
highlights the role of constraints in explaining empirically observed procyclical variation of
price-dividend ratios and countercyclical variation of stock return volatilities (i.e., positive
shocks to dividend growth rates lead to higher price-dividend ratios and lower stock return
volatilities).
We solve for the equilibrium in a continuous-time pure exchange economy with one
consumption good and two heterogeneous investors facing portfolio constraints. First, for
general preferences and constraints we provide a characterization of interest rates and market
prices of risk which highlight the role of constraints and risk sharing, and in speciﬁc economic
settings can explicitly be characterized in terms of empirically observable quantities such as
stock returns and consumption volatilities. Based on these results, we specialize to settings
with two CRRA investors one of whom is unconstrained while the other faces portfolio
constraints. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst derive the equilibrium when the constrained investor faces
an upper bound on the proportion of wealth invested in stocks.2 Then, we study the impact
of short-sale constraints on equilibrium when investors have diﬀerent beliefs about mean
dividend growth. The methodological contribution of the paper is a solution method for
the eﬃcient computation of equilibria in economies with constraints. Speciﬁcally, we derive
stock price-dividend ratios, stock return volatilities and other parameters in terms of wealth-
2Srinivas, Whitehouse and Yermo (2000) in a survey of pension fund regulations show that limits on both
domestic and foreign equity holdings of pension funds are in place in a number of OECD countries such
as Germany (30% on EU and 6% on non-EU equities), Switzerland (30% on domestic and 25% on foreign
equities) and Japan (30% on domestic and 30% on foreign equities), among others. Moreover, our approach
allows to study the impact of passive investors that hold a ﬁxed fraction of their wealth in stocks, as in
Chien, Cole and Lustig (2008). Samuelson and Zeckhouser (1988) document the popularity of this strategy
using as an example the participants of popular TIAA/CREF retirement plan who choose a fraction of
wealth to be invested in stocks and rarely change it due to “status quo bias”, while Campbell (2006) points
out that households may limit their participation in stock market and invest cautiously due to the lack of
necessary skills. Important special case of our framework is stock market non-participation which in year
2002 accounted for 50% of U.S. households (e.g., Guvenen, 2006).
15


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
consumption ratios that can be computed numerically via a simple iterative procedure with
fast convergence.
At the ﬁrst step of our analysis when we allow for general preferences, we demonstrate
that the riskless rates and market prices of risk include new terms that capture the eﬀects
of constraints and risk sharing. In speciﬁc settings we obtain the expressions for interest
rates and market prices of risk in terms of intuitive and empirically observable parameters
such as stock return and consumptions volatilities. The tractability of our results allows to
compare interest rates in constrained and unconstrained economies for a given allocation
of consumption among investors and demonstrate that for various constraints interest rates
will be lower in constrained economies whenever both investors have the same prudence-risk
aversion ratios.
Using the insights from the case with general preferences we show that when investors
have (identical for simplicity) CRRA preferences, one of them faces an upper bound on
the proportion of wealth invested in stocks, and dividends follow a geometric Brownian
motion, the interest rates and market prices of risk can explicitly be expressed in terms of
marginal utility ratios, their volatilities and the volatilities of stock returns. We completely
characterize the equilibrium by computing these volatilities numerically. While in models
with two logarithmic investors price-dividend ratios and stock return volatilities are deter-
ministic functions of time, in our setting these parameters depend on constrained investor’s
consumption share which evolves stochastically. The eﬀect of constraints on price-dividend
ratios and stock-return volatilities depends on the relative strength of classical income and
substitution eﬀects. When the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) is less than
one and hence the income eﬀect dominates, price-dividend ratios increase while stock re-
turn volatilities decrease with tighter constraints, and vice versa when IES is greater than
one and the substitution eﬀect is stronger.3 Moreover, the eﬀects of constraints are more
3When the investment opportunities worsen, the income eﬀect induces investors to decrease consumption
and save more while the substitution eﬀect induces them to consume more and save less due to cheaper
current consumption. For CRRA preferences with risk aversion γ, IES=1/γ, the income eﬀect dominates
for IES < 1 and the substitution eﬀect dominates for IES > 1 while for IES = 1 both eﬀects perfectly oﬀset
each other.
16


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
pronounced in bad times, when dividends are hit by adverse shocks, than in good times.
To understand the intuition, we ﬁrst evaluate the impact of portfolio constraints on
investment opportunity sets and demonstrate that interest rates decrease while market prices
of risk increase with tighter constraints, and that the eﬀects of constraints are stronger in
bad times.
When the portfolio constraint binds, negative shocks to dividends shift the
distribution of the aggregate wealth and consumption to the constrained investor since
she is less exposed to stock market ﬂuctuations. Thus, in bad times, when the constrained
investor holds a signiﬁcant fraction of aggregate wealth and consumption, the price-dividend
ratio is approximately equal to her wealth-consumption ratio. With tighter constraints the
investment opportunities of the constrained investor deteriorate since interest rates fall and
she is unable to beneﬁt from the increase in market prices of risk. As a result, her wealth-
consumption ratio, and hence the price-dividend ratio, increases when the income eﬀect
dominates and decreases when the substitution eﬀect dominates. The eﬀect of constraints
is weaker in good times since as the share of the unconstrained investor in aggregate wealth
and consumption increases, all the economic parameters, including price-dividend ratios,
converge to the parameters in the unconstrained economy.
Thus, when the substitution eﬀect dominates, price-dividend ratios turn out to be pro-
cyclical (lower in bad times than in good times) while stock return volatilities exceed the
volatility of dividends and are countercyclical (higher in bad times than in good times), con-
sistently with the empirical evidence (e.g., Schwert, 1989; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999).
Moreover, irrespective of investors’ intertemporal elasticities of substitution, market prices
of risk turn out to be countercyclical (e.g., Ferson and Harvey, 1991) since in bad times
unconstrained investors lose wealth and require higher compensation for risk taking, caus-
ing market prices of risk to go up. We also study the survival of constrained investors in
equilibrium and demonstrate that their impact on ﬁnancial markets is gradually eliminated
in the course of time but is signiﬁcant even after one hundred years.
Finally, we extend our baseline analysis to economic settings with heterogeneous beliefs
and multiple stocks. In both cases, for general preferences we derive expressions for interest
17


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
rates and market prices of risk similar to those in the baseline model.
In the case of
heterogeneous beliefs we solve for equilibrium in a model where two investors have the same
CRRA utilities and disagree on the dividend growth rate. The optimist is unconstrained
while the pessimist faces a constraint on the proportion of wealth that can be held in short
positions in stocks. We demonstrate that tighter short-sale constraints imply higher price-
dividend ratios since they increase the constrained investor’s demand for stocks. We also
ﬁnd that stock return volatility in the constrained economy can be both higher or lower
than the volatility in an unconstrained economy, depending on whether the latter is higher
or lower than the volatility of dividend growth. This is because the short-sale constraints
do not allow the investor to trade on her pessimism making her stockholding closer to what
it would be in the case of homogeneous beliefs, and hence, the stock return volatility shifts
towards volatility in an unconstrained homogeneous economy, given by the volatility of
dividends.
Our solution method is based on a combination of the duality approach and dynamic
programming. First, following Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992) we derive optimal consump-
tions in terms of the state price densities in equivalent unconstrained ﬁctitious economies in
which the interest rates and market prices of risk are adjusted to account for the diﬀerence
in investors’ behavior in constrained economies. Then, market clearing for consumption
yields expressions for equilibrium parameters in terms of the adjustment parameters that
solve a certain ﬁxed point problem. Moreover, in our speciﬁc examples these adjustments to
interest rates and market prices of risk can be derived in terms of instantaneous volatilities of
stock returns and the ratios of marginal utilities of the two investors. Next, these volatilities
and all the equilibrium parameters are explicitly characterized in terms of investors’ wealth-
consumption ratios that satisfy a system of quasilinear Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations.
We solve this system of equations numerically via a simple iterative procedure that requires
solving a simple system of linear equations at each step.
There is a growing literature studying dynamic equilibria in continuous-time economies
with heterogeneous investors and portfolio constraints assuming that constrained investors
18


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
have logarithmic preferences. Basak and Cuoco (1998) consider a model in which one in-
vestor is unconstrained and guided by a general time-additive utility function while the other
investor cannot invest in the stock market and has logarithmic preferences. They derive the
riskless rates and market prices of risk in this economy and characterize all the equilibrium
parameters explicitly when both investors are logarithmic. Detemple and Murthy (1997),
Basak and Croitoru (2000, 2006) present equilibrium models with two logarithmic investors,
heterogeneous beliefs and portfolio constraints. Hugonnier (2008) considers a similar model
and shows that under restricted participation the stock prices implied by market clearing
may contain a bubble and in the setting with multiple stocks the equilibrium might not be
unique. In contrast to our work all the above papers do not ﬁnd the impact of constraints
on stock prices and their moments.
Jarrow (1980) studies the equilibrium eﬀect of short-sale constraints in a one-period
economy with mean-variance investors that have heterogeneous beliefs. Dumas and Maen-
hout (2002) develop an approach with two central planners for solving incomplete-market
equilibrium with two CRRA investors. However, in their analysis the variance-covariance
matrix of returns is taken as given and hence they do not study the impact of constraints on
volatility. Kogan, Makarov and Uppal (2007) derive equilibrium parameters in an economy
with borrowing constraints when one investor is logarithmic while the other has general
CRRA utility and ﬁnd that all the moments of asset returns are deterministic and stock
return volatilities are unaﬀected by constraints. When little borrowing is permitted they
numerically ﬁnd interest rates and market prices of risk as functions of wealth distributions
but do not consider the volatilities of stock returns. He and Krishnamurthy (2008) consider
a model of intermediated asset pricing in which individual households are logarithmic and
invest into stock only via an intermediary guided by CRRA utility. Wu (2008) studies the
equilibrium in a setting with one unconstrained and one buy-and-hold CRRA investors.
Gallmeyer and Holliﬁeld (2008) study the asset pricing with short-sale constraints in the
presence of heterogeneous beliefs when the pessimist and optimist have logarithmic and
CRRA utilities respectively. They study equilibrium parameters by employing Monte-Carlo
19


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
simulations and derive conditions for stock return volatilities to be larger or lower than in
the unconstrained case assuming that investors have the same share of aggregate wealth at
the initial date.
Bhamra (2007) analyzes the eﬀect of liberalization on emerging markets’ cost of capital
in a model with two logarithmic investors, two stocks and one consumption good. Pavlova
and Rigobon (2008) and Schornick (2009) consider models with constrained logarithmic
investors and two consumption goods in international ﬁnance framework and derive various
asset-pricing implications assuming that investors face preference shocks. Longstaﬀ(2009)
develops a two-asset economy where one of the assets is non-tradable for a certain period
and logarithmic investors are heterogeneous in time discount parameter.
There are a number of papers that solve models with heterogeneous investors and port-
folio constraints numerically in discrete time. Cuoco and He (2001) consider a model with
general utilities and derive equilibrium asset prices in terms of stochastic weights of a rep-
resentative investor’s utility which are obtained numerically from a nonlinear system of
equations. Guvenen (2006) solves numerically a model with restricted market participa-
tion when investors are guided by recursive utilities. Chien, Cole and Lustig (2008) also
in a discrete-time framework consider a model with non-participants, passive and active
investors guided by CRRA preferences, where passive investors hold ﬁxed portfolios while
active ones adjust them each period. Gomes and Michaelides (2008) study numerically the
equilibrium with incomplete markets and investors subject to ﬁxed cost of stock market
participation and by calibration generate high equity premium and match observed market
participation rate. Dumas and Lyasoﬀ(2008) solve for equilibrium in various incomplete
market settings in discrete time by employing binomial trees. These works do not study
the impact of constraints on conditional stock return volatilities and do not provide expres-
sions for equilibrium parameters in terms of observable quantities as we do in this paper by
employing considerable ﬂexibility of continuous-time methods.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1.2, we derive interest
rates and market prices of risk for general utility functions under the assumption that the
20


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
dual optimization problem has a solution and discuss their properties. In Section 1.3 we
illustrate our solution method by computing the equilibrium in a model with two CRRA
investors where one investor is unconstrained while the other faces an upper bound on the
fraction of wealth invested in stocks. Section 1.4 extends our baseline analysis to the settings
with heterogeneous beliefs and multiple stocks. We also solve for equilibrium in a model with
heterogeneous beliefs in which one of the investors faces short-sale constraints. Section 1.5
concludes, Appendix A provides the proofs and Appendix B provides further details for our
numerical method.
1.2.
General Equilibrium with Constraints
1.2.1.
Economic Setup
We consider a continuous-time economy with one consumption good and an inﬁnite horizon.
The uncertainty is represented by a ﬁltered probability space (Ω, F, {Ft}, P), on which is
deﬁned a Brownian motion w. All the stochastic processes that appear in the paper are
adapted to {Ft, t ∈[0, ∞)}, the augmented ﬁltration generated by w.
The investors trade continuously in two securities, a riskless bond in zero net supply
with instantaneous interest rate r and a stock in a positive net supply, normalized to one
unit. The stock is a claim to an exogenous strictly positive stream of dividends δ following
the dynamics
dδt = δt[µδtdt + σδtdwt],
(1)
where the dividend mean-return, µδ, and volatility, σδ, are stochastic processes. The divi-
dend process (1) and its moments are assumed to be well-deﬁned, without explicitly stating
the regularity conditions. We consider equilibria in which bond prices, B, and stock prices,
S, follow processes
dBt
=
Btrtdt,
(2)
dSt + δtdt
=
St[µtdt + σtdwt],
(3)
21


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
where the interest rate r, the stock mean return µ and volatility σ are stochastic processes
determined in equilibrium, and bond price at time 0 is normalized so that B0 = 1.
There are two investors in the economy. Investor 1 is endowed with s units of stock
and −b units of bond, while investor 2 is endowed with 1 −s units of stock and b units of
bond. The investors choose consumption, ci, and an investment policy, {αi, θi}, where αi
and θi denote the fractions of wealth invested in bonds and stocks, respectively, and hence,
αi + θi = 1. Investor i’s wealth process W evolves as
dWit =
h
Wit

rt + θit(µt −rt)

−cit
i
dt + Witθitσtdwt,
(4)
and her investment policies are subject to portfolio constraints
θi ∈Θi,
i = 1, 2,
(5)
where Θi = [θi, θi]. We also assume that initial endowments of stocks are such that θi at
time 0 belong to sets Θi. Thus, the ﬁnancial market in our economy is incomplete due to
the presence of portfolio constraints (5).
Each investor i (i = 1, 2) is guided by an expected utility over a stream of consumption
c. In particular, her dynamic optimization is given by
max
ci, θi E
hZ ∞
0
e−ρtui(cit)dt
i
,
(6)
subject to the budget constraint (4), no-bankruptcy constraint Wt ≥0 and portfolio con-
straints (5), for some discount parameter ρ > 0. The utility functions ui(c) are assumed to
be increasing, concave, three times continuously diﬀerentiable, satisfying Inada’s conditions
lim
c↓0 u′
i(c) = ∞,
lim
c↑∞u′
i(c) = 0,
i = 1, 2.
(7)
By Ait and Pit we denote absolute risk aversion and prudence parameters of investor i, given
by
Ait = −u′′
i (c)
u′
i(c) ,
Pit = −u′′′
i (c)
u′′
i (c) ,
(8)
and assume that both are strictly positive for each investor.
22


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Next, we deﬁne an equilibrium in this economy as a set of parameters {rt, µt, σt} and of
consumption and investment policies {c∗
it, α∗
it, θ∗
it}2
i=1 such that consumption and investment
policies solve dynamic optimization problem (6) for each investor, given price parameters
{rt, µt, σt}, and consumption and ﬁnancial markets clear, i.e.,
c∗
1t + c∗
2t
=
δt,
α∗
1tW ∗
1t + α∗
2tW ∗
2t
=
0,
θ∗
1tW ∗
1t + θ∗
2tW ∗
2t
=
St,
(9)
where W ∗
1t and W ∗
2t denote optimal wealths of investors 1 and 2 under optimal consumption
and investment policies.
1.2.2.
Characterization of Equilibrium
This Section characterizes the parameters of equilibria and studies their properties in economies
with constrained investors. In particular, by employing the duality method of Karatzas and
Cvitanic (1992), we recover expressions for interest rates and market prices of risk in equi-
librium in terms of the parameters of equivalent ﬁctitious unconstrained economies. These
expressions are intuitive and highlight the impact of risk-sharing and attitude towards risk
on equilibrium parameters. Moreover, they form a basis for an eﬃcient methodology for
computing equilibria, which we develop in Section 1.3.
We start by noting that since the market is incomplete due to the presence of portfolio
constraints, a Pareto optimal allocation may not be feasible and hence, the ratio of the
marginal utilities of consumption of the investors follows a stochastic process. This ratio
can be interpreted as a stochastic weight in the construction of a representative-investor
preferences in an equivalent economy, and serves as a state variable in terms of which the
equilibrium can be characterized (e.g., Basak and Cuoco, 1998; Cuoco and He, 2001). By
employing the methodology of Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992) we obtain optimal consump-
23


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
tions and then derive the equilibrium parameters from the market clearing conditions.4 This
approach is similar to the approach in Basak (2000), who characterizes the equilibrium in
an economy where investors have heterogeneous beliefs, but in contrast to our work are
unconstrained.
We start by characterizing optimal consumptions of constrained investors in a partial
equilibrium in which the investment opportunities are taken as given, and then obtain the
interest rate r, and the market price of risk κ, from the consumption clearing condition.
For each investor i, following the approach of Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992), we characterize
the optimality conditions for consumption by embedding investor i’s partial equilibrium
economy into an equivalent ﬁctitious complete-market economy with bond and stock prices
following dynamics with adjusted parameters:
dBt
=
Bt[rt + f(ν∗
it)]dt,
(10)
dSt + δtdt
=
St[(µt + ν∗
it + f(ν∗
it))dt + σtdwt],
(11)
where fi(ν) are support functions for the sets of portfolio constraints Θi, deﬁned as
fi(ν) = sup
θ∈Θi
(−νθ),
(12)
and ν∗
1t and ν∗
2t solve so called dual optimization problem, deﬁned in Cvitanic and Karatzas
(1992), and lie in the eﬀective domains for support functions, given by
Υi = {ν ∈R : fi(ν) < ∞}.
(13)
It follows from the dynamics of bond and stock prices in ﬁctitious economy (10)–(11) that
the corresponding state prices ξit evolve as
dξit = −ξit[ritdt + κitdwt],
(14)
where rit and κit denote the adjusted riskless rate and market price of risk in ﬁctitious
economy i, given by
rit = rt + fi(ν∗
it),
κit = κt + ν∗
it
σt
,
(15)
4Cuoco (1997) studies consumption-portfolio choice of constrained investors, mainly at a partial equilib-
rium level, and extends the results of Cvitanic and Karatzas to the case of more general utility functions and
forms of market incompleteness. He derives a CAPM in an economy with portfolio constraints but does not
study interest rates and other parameters of equilibrium.
24


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
where κ = (µ −r)/σ is the market price of risk in the original constrained economy.
Throughout this Section we assume that the solutions to dual optimization problems
exist and since the ﬁctitious economies are complete, the marginal utilities of optimal con-
sumption are given by
e−ρtu′
i(c∗
it) = ψiξit,
i = 1, 2,
(16)
for some constants ψi > 0. The ﬁrst order conditions (16) and state prices (14) demonstrate
that consumption and investment decisions of the constrained investor are equivalent to
those of an unconstrained one, who faces interest rates and market prices of risk adjusted
to account for the constraints. Moreover, optimality conditions in (16) allow to express
consumptions c∗
it in terms of state prices in ﬁctitious economies as follows:
c∗
it = Ii(ψieρtξit),
i = 1, 2,
(17)
where Ii(·) denote inverse functions for marginal utilities u′
i(·).
The expressions for marginal utilities in (16) also imply that the ratio of investors’
marginal utilities, deﬁned as
λt = u′
1(c∗
1t)
u′
2(c∗
2t),
(18)
is stochastic in equilibrium, and not a constant as in complete markets (e.g., Karatzas
and Shreve, 1998) where consumption allocations are Pareto eﬃcient. Basak and Cuoco
(1998) and Cuoco and He (2001) demonstrate that the process λ serves as a convenient
state variable in terms of which the equilibrium parameters can be expressed. Moreover, in
an equivalent complete-market economy with a representative investor, parameter λ can be
interpreted as a stochastic weight in the utility u(c; λ) of a representative investor, given by
u(c; λ) =
max
c1+c2=c u1(c1) + λu2(c2),
(19)
and follows a stochastic process
dλt = −λt[µλtdt + σλtdwt].
(20)
The parameters µλ and σλ are determined in equilibrium and quantify the violation of
Pareto-optimality in the economy.
25


=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Next we characterize the parameters of our economy in equilibrium in terms of adjust-
ments ν∗
it from the market clearing in consumption. To determine the interest rate r and
market price of risk κ we substitute optimal consumptions (17) into consumption clearing
condition in (9), apply Itˆo’s Lemma to both sides and recover equilibrium parameters by
matching the drift and volatility terms. Similarly, from optimality conditions (16), by ap-
plying Itˆo’s Lemma to equation (18) for λt and comparing the result with the process for λt
in (20) we recover parameters µλ and σλ. The following Proposition summarizes our results.
Proposition 1.1. If there exists an equilibrium, the riskless interest rate r, market price
of risk κ, drift µλ and volatility σλ of weighting process λ that follows (20) are given by
rt
=
¯rt −At
A1t
f1(ν∗
1t) −At
A2t
f2(ν∗
2t) −A3
t (P1t + P2t)
2A2
1tA2
2t
σ2
λt −
A3
t
A1tA2t
 P1t
A1t
−P2t
A2t

δtσδtσλt,
(21)
κt
=
¯κt −At
A1t
ν∗
1t
σt
−At
A2t
ν∗
2t
σt
,
(22)
µλt
=
Atδtσδtσλt + f1(ν∗
1t) −f2(ν∗
2t) −At
A1t
σ2
λt,
σλt = ν∗
1t −ν∗
2t
σt
,
(23)
where ¯r is the riskless rate and ¯κ is the market price of risk in an unconstrained economy,
given by
¯rt = ρ + Atδtµδt −AtPt
2
δ2
t σ2
δt,
¯κt = Atδtσδt
(24)
Ait, Pit, and At and Pt are absolute risk aversions and prudence parameters of investor i
and a representative investor with utility (19), respectively.5
Optimal consumptions c∗
i , wealths Wi, stock S and optimal investment policies θ∗
i are given
by
c∗
it
=
gi(δt, λt),
(25)
W ∗
it
=
1
ξit
Et
hZ ∞
0
ξisc∗
isds
i
,
(26)
5As demonstrated in Basak (2000), the risk aversion, A, and prudence, P, of the representative investor
can be obtained from the following expressions:
1
At =
1
A1t +
1
A2t ,
Pt
A2
t
= P1t
A2
1t
+ P2t
A2
2t
.
26


=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
St
=
W ∗
1t + W ∗
2t,
(27)
θ∗
it
=
1
σt

W ∗
it

κt + ν∗
it
σt

+φit
ξit

,
(28)
where functions gi(δt, λt) are such that c∗
1t and c∗
2t satisfy consumption clearing in (9) and
equation (18) for process λ, state prices ξit follow processes (14) and φi are such that
Mit ≡Et
hZ ∞
0
ξisc∗
isds
i
= Mi0 +
Z t
0
φisdws.
Initial value λ0 is such that the budget constraints at time 0 are satisﬁed:
siS0 + bi = W ∗
i0,
(29)
where s1 = s, s2 = 1 −s, b1 = −b and b2 = b. Moreover, adjustments ν∗
it satisfy comple-
mentary slackness condition
fi(ν∗
it) + θ∗
itν∗
it = 0.
(30)
Proposition 1.1 provides the characterization of equilibrium parameters in terms of ad-
justments ν∗
i in ﬁctitious economy. Expression (21) decomposes interest rates r into groups
of terms that separate the eﬀects of constraints and the ineﬃciency of risk sharing. The
ﬁrst term in (21) is the riskless rate in the unconstrained economy with the representative
investor. The next two terms capture the eﬀect of binding constraints on interest rates and
tend to increase or decrease them depending on the signs of support functions fi(ν). In
particular, these terms are positive in economic settings with binding portfolio constraints
when investors buy more bonds. This is due to the fact that the investors behave as if their
subjective interest rates rit in their ﬁctitious economy were higher than in the real one, and
hence positive adjustments fi(ν∗
i ). Finally, the last two terms in expression (21) capture the
eﬀect of risk sharing, quantiﬁed by volatility σλ. The weight λ acts as a state variable that
gives rise to speciﬁc hedging demands that can push interest rates in either direction.
Similarly, the expression (22) for the market price of risk is comprised of the market
price of risk in an unconstrained economy (ﬁrst term in (22)) and the eﬀects of constraints
27


=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
(second and third terms in (22)). Expressions for the drift µλ and volatility σλ parameters
of the stochastic weighting process λ in (23) demonstrate that this process, in general, is no
longer a local martingale as in works assuming logarithmic constrained investor (e.g., Basak
and Cuoco, 1998; Gallmeyer and Holliﬁeld, 2008; Pavlova and Rigobon, 2008). Finally we
observe that optimal consumptions, wealths, stock prices and investments can be obtained
from expressions (25) – (28) when the parameters of equilibrium, and hence all state prices,
are known.
The results in Proposition 1.1 can also be used to compute the equilibrium parameters
numerically. On one hand, Proposition 1.1 expresses equilibrium parameters and investment
policies in terms of adjustments ν∗
i , and on the other, the adjustments can be obtained from
the complementary slackness condition (30). Thus, ﬁnding the adjustments becomes essen-
tially a ﬁxed point problem, which can potentially be solved by the method of successive
iterations. Moreover, as demonstrated in Huang and Pages (1992), under certain condi-
tions optimal wealths (26) satisfy linear PDEs with coeﬃcients determined by equilibrium
parameters while optimal policies (28) can be expressed in terms of derivatives of wealths
W ∗
i . Hence, the adjustments can be expressed in terms of derivatives of Wit from conditions
(30) and substituted back into the PDEs for optimal wealths. Thus, the characterization of
equilibrium reduces to solving a system of quasilinear PDEs which, as we demonstrate in
Section 1.3, can eﬃciently be solved numerically for speciﬁc constraints.
1.2.3.
Further Properties of Equilibrium
We here explore the implications of Proposition 1.1 by noting that in various economic
settings the signs of adjustments ν∗
i and support functions fi(ν) can easily be determined
explicitly from the deﬁnitions of support functions and eﬀective domains in (12) and (13).
Moreover, the interest rates r and market prices of risk κ can be expressed in terms of
empirically observed quantities, such as stock and consumption volatilities, thus providing
empirical implications of the model.
28


=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Table 1.1
Eﬀective Domains and Support Functions
Case
Constraint
Υ
f(ν)
(a)
θ ∈R
0
0
(b)
θ = 0
R
0
(c)
θ ≤θ ≤θ, θ ≤0
R
+
(d)
θ ≤θ, θ > 0
ν ≤0
+
(e)
θ ≥θ, θ < 0
ν ≥0
+
(f)
θ ≥θ, θ > 0
ν ≥0
−
Table 1.1 presents the eﬀective domains and the signs of the support functions for plau-
sible constraints and allows to analyze their eﬀect on equilibrium parameters. For example,
when investors face constraints on the proportion of wealth invested in stocks (case (d) in
Table 1.1) the results in Proposition 1.1 and Table 1.1 imply that these constraints tend
to decrease the interest rates and increase the market prices of risk relative to an uncon-
strained model if stock volatility σ is strictly positive. Hence, these constraints work in the
right direction for explaining the equity premium puzzle (e.g., Mehra and Prescott, 1985).
The overall eﬀect of constraints on interest rates is convoluted by the risk sharing captured
by the last two terms in the expression for interest rates (21). The following Corollary to
Proposition 1.1 establishes simple suﬃcient conditions under which the interest rate r will
be lower than the interest rate ¯r in a representative-investor unconstrained economy.
Corollary 1.1. If the utility functions and the allocation of consumption are such that
P1/A1 = P2/A2 and the sets of portfolio constraints have positive support functions fi(ν)
then the interest rate in a constrained economy, r, is lower than in an unconstrained one,
¯r, and the following upper bound for rate r holds:
rt ≤¯rt −A3
t (P1t + P2t)
2A2
1tA2
2t
σ2
λ.
(31)
The Corollary demonstrates that the inability to share risks contributes to the decrease of
29


=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
interest rates by creating hedging needs against ﬂuctuating ratios of marginal utilities λ. The
condition that investors have the same prudence-risk aversion ratio is in particular satisﬁed
when both investors have identical HARA preferences.6
In the case of two logarithmic
investors when one of them is unconstrained the result in Corollary 1.1 has also been pointed
out in the literature (e.g., Basak and Cuoco, 1998).
Conveniently, in various economic settings interest rates and market price of risk can
be expressed only in terms of the parameters of utility functions and empirically observed
parameters.
For example, when investor 1 is unconstrained and investor 2 faces a con-
straint allowing her to invest in stock no more than a certain fraction of wealth (case (d) of
Table 1.1), it can be observed that parameters r and κ are given by:
rt = ¯rt −At
A2t
¯θσtσλt −A3
t (P1t + P2t)
2A2
1tA2
2t
σ2
λt −
A3
t
A1tA2t
 P1t
A1t
−P2t
A2t

δtσδtσλt,
κt = ¯κt + At
A2t
σλt,
(32)
where stock return volatility σ can easily be obtained from the data, while the weighting
process volatility σλ can be obtained in terms of utility parameters and the parameters
of the consumption processes for each investor. In particular, assuming that consumption
processes ci for each investor follow Itˆo’s processes
dcit = cit[µcitdt + σcitdwt],
(33)
applying Itˆo’s Lemma to the deﬁnition of weighting process λ in (18) we ﬁnd that
σλt = A1tc1tσc1t −A2tc2tσc2t.
(34)
In speciﬁc frameworks the volatilities of consumption growth can potentially be estimated
from the data. In particular, for the model with restricted participation (¯θ = 0) Malloy,
Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) estimate consumption volatilities of stock market
participants and non-participants to be 3.6% and 1.4% respectively, while Mankiw and
Zeldes (1991) and Guvenen (2006) show that the share of consumption of non-participants
6For HARA utility function absolute risk aversion is given by −u′′(c)/u′(c) = γ/(γ0 + c). Diﬀerentiating
both sides of this expression and then dividing by −u′′(c)/u′(c) we obtain that Pi/Ai = 1 + γ, and hence,
the prudence-risk aversion ratio is the same for both investors.
30


=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
in aggregate consumption is 0.68.
As a result, the expressions for r and κ in (32) can
potentially be used for identifying the parameters of the utility functions of investors as well
as for quantifying the impact of risk sharing ineﬃciencies on the interest rates and market
prices of risk.
1.3.
Equilibrium with Proportional Constraints
This Section applies the results of Section 1.2 to compute and analyze the equilibrium in
a speciﬁc economic setting in which investor 1 is unconstrained while investor 2 faces a
constraint allowing her to invest in stock no more than a certain fraction of wealth. For
simplicity we assume that dividends follow a geometric Brownian motion and both investors
have identical CRRA preferences. Using the results of Section 1.2, in Section 1.3.1 we present
a simple solution method for ﬁnding an equilibrium in this economy, and in Section 1.3.2
we study the impact of constraints on the equilibrium. In our setting with fully rational
investors we also study the survival of constrained investors in the long run and demonstrate
that it takes a long time to eliminate their impact on ﬁnancial markets.
1.3.1.
Characterization and Computation of Equilibrium
In this Section we present a solution method which allows to compute the equilibrium in
an eﬃcient way. This method does not rely on a widely used assumption of a logarithmic
constrained investor (e.g., Detemple and Murthy, 1997; Basak and Cuoco, 1998; Basak
and Croitoru, 2000, 2006; Kogan, Makarov and Uppal, 2003; Bhamra, 2007; Gallmeyer
and Holliﬁeld, 2008; Hugonnier, 2008; Pavlova and Rigobon, 2008; Schornick, 2009) which
allows to derive the adjustments ν∗
i in ﬁctitious economy explicitly at the cost of investor’s
myopia inherent in logarithmic preferences. In discrete time, Cuoco and He (2001), Guvenen
(2006), Chien, Cole and Lustig (2008) and Gomes and Michaelides (2008) study the models
with constrained heterogeneous investors numerically without assuming that constrained
investor is logarithmic. In contrast to these works, in settings with two CRRA investors the
ﬂexibility of continuous-time analysis allows us to recover tractable expressions for interest
rates and market prices of risk and to ﬁnd new insights on the impact of constraints on
31


=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
price-dividend ratios and stock return volatilities.
Finding an equivalent unconstrained economy is a challenging problem which so far
has only been solved for logarithmic investors (e.g., Cvitanic and Karatzas, 1992; Karatzas
and Shreve, 1998) or CRRA investors but assuming constant investment opportunity sets
(e.g., Tepla, 2000a).
We tackle this problem by ﬁrst expressing the parameters of the
ﬁctitious economy in terms of the stochastic weighting process λ, and the volatilities of λ and
stock returns, which then are obtained in terms of the investors’ wealth-consumption ratios
satisfying Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations. Even though in equilibrium the coeﬃcients
of HJB equations themselves depend on the sensitivities of wealth-consumption ratios with
respect to parameter λ, we demonstrate that the time-independent solutions can easily be
obtained via an iterative procedure that at each step requires solving a simple system of
linear algebraic equations.
Throughout Section 1.3 we assume for simplicity that dividends follow a geometric Brow-
nian motion
dδt = δt[µδdt + σδdwt],
(35)
both investors have CRRA utilities with relative risk aversion parameter γ, given by7
ui(c) = c1−γ −1
1 −γ
,
i = 1, 2,
(36)
and solve optimization problem in (6) subject to budget constraint (4), no-bankruptcy
constraint Wt ≥0, and portfolio constraint θ ≤¯θ for investor 2, while investor 1 is uncon-
strained. By Ji(Wt, λt, t) we denote the indirect utility function of investor i.
For convenience, we solve the optimization problem of constrained investor 2 in an
equivalent ﬁctitious unconstrained economy in which she maximizes objective function (6)
subject to budget constraint
dW2t =
h
W2t

rt + f2(ν∗
2t) + θ2t(µt −rt + ν∗
2t)

−c2t
i
dt + W2tθ2tσtdwt,
(37)
7The assumption that investors have identical risk aversions is made for simplicity. More general case can
be considered along the same lines.
32


=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
where ν∗
2t and f2(ν∗
2t) are adjustments to stock mean returns and riskless rates respectively.
By applying dynamic programming we ﬁnd that the indirect utility functions should satisfy
the following HJB equations:
0 = max
ci,θi
n
e−ρt c1−γ
it
1 −γ + ∂Jit
∂t +
h
Wit

rt + fi(ν∗
it) + θit(µt −rt + ν∗
it)

−cit
i ∂Jit
∂Wit
−λtµλt
∂Jit
∂λt
+ 1
2
h
W 2
itθ2
itσ2
t
∂2Jit
∂W 2
it
−2Witθitλtσtσλt
∂2Jit
∂Wit∂λt
+ λ2
t σ2
λt
∂2Jit
∂λ2
t
io
,
(38)
with transversality condition Et[JiT] →0 as T →∞, which guarantees the convergence of
the integral in investors’ optimization (6). We next obtain expressions for ν∗
i and fi(ν∗
i )
without solving the dual problem by noting that since investor 1 is unconstrained ν∗
1 = 0
(case (a) in Table 1.1) while ν∗
2 can be obtained from equilibrium expression for σλt in (23),
and hence,
ν∗
1t = 0,
f1(ν∗
1t) = 0,
ν∗
2t = −σtσλt,
f2(ν∗
2t) = ¯θσtσλt.
(39)
The HJB equations in (38) are standard except for the fact that the equation for investor
2 is in terms of parameters of ﬁctitious economy, which allows to formulate her problem as
an unconstrained one. We conjecture that the indirect utility functions are given by
Ji(Wi, λ, t) = e−ρt W 1−γ
i
1 −γ Hi(λ, t)γ,
i = 1, 2.
(40)
Then, from the ﬁrst order conditions with respect to consumption we obtain
c∗
it = Wit
Hit
,
i = 1, 2,
(41)
where Hit is a shorthand notation for Hi(λ, t), and hence, functions Hit can be interpreted
as the wealth-consumption ratio of investor i. By substituting indirect utility functions (40)
into HJB equations it can be veriﬁed that wealth-consumption ratios satisfy the following
PDEs:
∂Hit
∂t +λ2
t σ2
λt
2
∂2Hit
∂λ2
t
−λt

µλt+1 −γ
γ
κitσλt
∂Hit
∂λt
+
1 −γ
2γ κ2
it+(1−γ)rit−ρ
Hit
γ +1 = 0,
i = 1, 2,
(42)
33


=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
where rit and κit denote riskless rate and price of risk in a ﬁctitious economy and are
deﬁned in (15) in terms of adjustments given in (39). Moreover, optimal investment policies
for investors 1 and 2 are given by
θit =
1
γσt

κit −γσλt
∂Hit
∂λt
λt
Hit

,
i = 1, 2.
(43)
Since the horizon is inﬁnite we will look for time-independent and bounded solutions
of equations (42).
Moreover, throughout this Section we assume that ¯θ ≤1.
We note
that if investor 2 faces borrowing constraint, i.e. ¯θ ≥1, the equilibrium coincides with the
equilibrium in an unconstrained economy in which the investors, being identical, optimally
choose θ∗
it = 1.
Conveniently, since the ﬁctitious economy is complete, the equations for wealth-consumption
ratios in (42) are linear if volatilities σ and σλ are known. However, in equilibrium these
volatilities themselves depend on wealth-consumption ratios Hi. The stock return volatil-
ity σ can be obtained by applying Itˆo’s Lemma to stock price St = Rtδt, where Rt is a
shorthand notation for the stock price-dividend ratio which can be expressed in terms of
wealth-consumption ratios from the market clearing conditions in (9). Furthermore, the
volatility σλ can be obtained from the complementary slackness condition (30). The follow-
ing Proposition 1.2 summarizes our results and provides a characterization of equilibrium
in terms of wealth-consumption ratios.
Proposition 1.2. If there exists an equilibrium, the riskless interest rate r, market price
of risk κ and drift µλ of weighting process λ that follows (20) are given by
rt
=
¯r −
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
¯θσtσλt −1 + γ
2γ
λ1/γ
t
(1 + λ1/γ
t
)2 σ2
λt,
(44)
κt
=
¯κ +
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
σλt,
(45)
µλt
=
γσδσλt −¯θσtσλt −
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
σ2
λt,
(46)
where ¯r is the riskless rate and ¯κ is the market price of risk in an unconstrained economy,
34


=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
given by
¯r = ρ + γµδ −γ(1 + γ)
2
σ2
δ,
¯κ = γσδ.
(47)
Optimal consumptions c∗
i , wealths W ∗
i , stock price-dividend ratio R and optimal investment
policies θ∗
i are given by
c∗
1t
=
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
c∗
2t =
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
(48)
W ∗
1t
=
H1t
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
W ∗
2t = H2t
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
(49)
Rt
=
H1t
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
+ H2t
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
,
(50)
θ∗
1t
=
1
γσt

κt −γσλt
∂H1t
∂λt
λt
H1t

,
θ∗
2t = ¯θ,
(51)
while the volatilities of the stock returns, σ, and weighting process, σλ, are given by
σt = σδ −σλt
∂Rt
∂λt
λt
Rt
,
σλt =
(1 −¯θ)γσδ
1
1+λ1/γ
t
+ γ ∂H2t
∂λt
λt
H2t −¯θγ ∂Rt
∂λt
λt
Rt
,
(52)
where wealth-consumption ratios H1t and H2t satisfy equations (42). Moreover, the initial
value λ0 for the weighting process (20) solves equation
sH2(λ0, 0)
λ1/γ
0
1 + λ1/γ
0
δ0 −(1 −s)H1(λ0, 0)
1
1 + λ1/γ
0
δ0 = b.
(53)
The expressions for riskless rate r and price of risk κ in Proposition 1.2 are in terms
of the of volatilities σ and σλ, as well as parameter λ1/γ which in our economic setting
can be interpreted as the ratio of consumptions of investors 2 and 1, as it follows from the
expressions in (48). As in the general case in Proposition 1.1, interest rates are comprised
of three terms, where the ﬁrst term is a riskless rate in an unconstrained economy, while the
second and third terms highlight the impact of constraints and risk sharing. Moreover, the
eﬀect of risk sharing, as captured by volatility σλ, can be expressed in terms of consumption
volatilities. In particular, from expression (34) it follows that
σλt = γ(σc1t −σc2t).
(54)
35


=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
It will be demonstrated later that volatility σλ is positive in equilibrium since investor 1 is
more exposed to risk and hence her consumption growth is more volatile.
Proposition 1.2 also demonstrates that when ¯θ < 1 the portfolio constraint of investor
2 is always binding since otherwise, having identical preferences, both investors should ﬁnd
optimal to invest θi < 1 which contradicts market clearing conditions (9). Moreover, Propo-
sition 1.2 provides expressions for equilibrium volatilities σ and σλ in terms of the elasticities
of wealth-consumption and price-dividend ratios with respect to weighting process λ, given
by
ϵH2t = ∂H2t
∂λt
λt
H2t
,
ϵPt = ∂Rt
∂λt
λt
Rt
.
(55)
From the expression for the volatility σλ in (52) it follows that σλ is decreasing in elasticity
ϵH2 and increasing in ϵP. The eﬀect of elasticities in (55) on volatility σλ then determines
their impact on all the other parameters in equilibrium.
To understand the eﬀect of these elasticities on volatility σλ we observe that elasticity
ϵH2 is proportional to the stock hedging demand of investor 2 given by the second term in
the expression for optimal policy (43). Moreover, since σλ is positive, it follows from this
expression that higher elasticity ϵH2 tends to decrease optimal investment in stock. Thus,
higher ϵH2 makes the stock less attractive, and hence reduces the cost of being constrained.
Therefore, σλ also decreases to reﬂect decreased risk sharing distortions of the constraint.
Moreover, as follows from the expressions for volatilities (52) the increase in elasticity ϵP
tends to decrease stock volatility σ since the dividends and weighting process are negatively
correlated.
Hence, if volatility σ decreases, the stock becomes more attractive for both
investors. However, since investor 2 is constrained, her ideal unconstrained holding moves
further away from her constrained holding ¯θ and hence the risks are shared in a less optimal
way and σλ increases.
Proposition 1.2 also allows to explicitly identify the coeﬃcients of PDEs (42) for wealth-
consumption ratios Hi, which depend on equilibrium parameters identiﬁed in expressions
(44)–(52). Moreover, it appears that the coeﬃcients themselves depend on ratios Hi and
36


=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
hence, we obtain a system of quasilinear PDEs the solutions to which completely charac-
terize the equilibrium. We next solve for time-independent solutions of PDEs (42) which
correspond to the inﬁnite horizon case. To solve the equations (42), we ﬁrst ﬁx a large
horizon parameter T, choose a starting value for Hi(λ, T) and then solve the equation back-
wards using a modiﬁcation of Euler’s ﬁnite-diﬀerence method until the solution converges to
a stationary one. This approach is similar to the subsequent iterations method for solving
Bellman equations in discrete time (e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2004) when at a distant
time in the future the value function is set equal to some function (usually zero) and then
the value functions at earlier dates are obtained by solving equations backwards.
Since weight λ varies from zero to inﬁnity, we ﬁrst perform a change of variable and
rewrite the PDEs (42) as well as the equilibrium parameters in Proposition 1.2 in terms of
constrained investor’s share in aggregate consumption, given by
yt =
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
.
(56)
Variable y takes values in the interval [0, 1] and provides one-to-one mapping to variable
λ. The solution of PDEs in terms of new variable we label as ˜Hi(y, t). Assuming that
the solutions to new PDEs are continuous and twice continuously diﬀerentiable, setting
in those equations y = 0 and y = 1 we recover boundary conditions for ˜Hi(y, t). Next, we
replace the derivatives by their ﬁnite-diﬀerence analogues letting the time and state variable
increments denote ∆t ≡T/M and ∆y ≡1/N, where M and N are integer numbers. Solving
the equation backwards, sitting at time t we compute the coeﬃcients of ﬁnite-diﬀerence
analogues of PDEs (42) using the solutions ˜Hi(y, t + ∆t) obtained from the previous step
t + ∆t. As a result, the coeﬃcients of equations for ˜Hi(y, t) are known at time t and hence
˜Hi(y, t) can be found by solving a system of linear ﬁnite-diﬀerence equations with three-
diagonal matrix.
Appendix B provides further details of the numerical algorithm.
The
wealth-consumption ratios then allow us to derive all the parameters of equilibrium.
Remark 1 (Bond prices). Proposition 1.2 allows to determine the instantaneous interest
rate rt. Therefore, the bond price Bt can be obtained by solving numerically the equation
37


=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
y
r
Interest Rates (a)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
y
κ
Market Prices of Risk (b)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
y
R
Stock Price−Dividend Ratios (c)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
y
σ/σδ
Ratios of Stock Return and Dividend Growth Volatilities (d)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
Figure 1.1: Parameters of Equilibrium with Constraints, γ < 1.
The ﬁgure plots interest rates r, market prices of risk κ, price-dividend ratios R and ratios of stock
return and dividend growth volatilities σ/σδ as functions of constrained investor’s consumption share
y. Dividend mean growth rate µδ = 1.8% and volatility σδ = 3.2% are from the estimates in Campbell
(2003), based on consumption data in 1891–1998, while risk aversion and time discount are set to
γ = 0.8 and ρ = 0.01.
for the bond price dynamics (2).
Remark 2 (Existence of Equilibrium). The numerical analysis shows that the function
on the left-hand side of the equation for λ0 in (53) is a monotone function of λ0 and maps
interval [0, ∞) into [C0, C1), where C0 and C1 are some constants, and hence, if b ∈[C0, C1)
there always exists the unique solution λ0 that satisﬁes the equation. Given the existence
of λ0 and the solutions to HJB equations (42), expressions (44)–(52) fully characterize the
equilibrium in the economy.
38


=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
1.3.2.
Analysis of Equilibrium
We now study the impact of constraints on various equilibrium parameters. Important im-
plication of our model is that in contrast to models with logarithmic investors the constraints
do aﬀect the price-dividend ratios and stock return volatilities. Figures 1.1 and 1.2 present
equilibrium interest rates, market prices of risk, price-dividend ratios and the ratios of stock
return and dividend growth volatilities as functions of constrained investor’s consumption
share y for diﬀerent levels of the tightness of constraints ¯θ when risk aversions are less than
unity (γ = 0.8) and greater than unity (γ = 3), respectively. The equilibrium is derived
under plausible parameters for the dividend process.8 We note that in our model the instan-
taneous changes in the dividend growth dδ/δ and constrained investor’s consumption share
dy are negatively correlated since negative shocks to dividends shift relative consumption to
constrained investors, due to the fact that the latter are less aﬀected by adverse stock market
ﬂuctuations. Hence, higher consumption share y is associated with bad times while lower
y is associated with good times. Following the literature (e.g., Chan and Kogan, 2002) we
label economic variables as procyclical if they increase in good times (when dividend growth
rate shocks are positive) and decrease in bad times (when dividend growth rate shocks are
negative), and as countercyclical if they decrease in good times and increase in bad times.
For risk aversion less than unity Figure 1.1 demonstrates that tighter constraints de-
crease interest rates and price-dividend ratios, and increase market prices of risk and stock
return volatilities. For risk aversion greater than unity, Figure 1.2 shows that tighter con-
straints decrease interest rates and stock return volatilities, and increase market prices of
risk and price-dividend ratios. In both cases the impact of constraints is asymmetric and is
more pronounced in bad times, when consumption share y is larger. We ﬁrst analyze the
equilibrium parameters for the case γ < 1, presented on Figure 1.1, and then for the case
γ > 1, presented on Figure 1.2.
8In particular, the parameters for the dividend process (µδ = 1.8%, σδ = 3.2%) are taken from the
estimates in Campbell (2003), based on consumption data in 1891–1998 years, and the discounting parameter
is set to ρ = 0.01.
39


=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
y
r
Interest Rates (a)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
y
κ
Market Prices of Risk (b)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
20
25
30
35
y
R
Stock Price−Dividend Ratios (c)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
y
σ/σδ
Ratios of Stock Return and Dividend Growth Volatilities (d)
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
Figure 1.2: Parameters of Equilibrium with Constraints, γ > 1.
The ﬁgure plots interest rates r, market prices of risk κ, price-dividend ratios R and ratios of stock
return and dividend growth volatilities σ/σδ as functions of constrained investor’s consumption share
y. Dividend mean growth rate µδ = 1.8% and volatility σδ = 3.2% are from the estimates in Campbell
(2003), based on consumption data in 1891–1998, while risk aversion and time discount are set to
γ = 3 and ρ = 0.01.
Panel (a) of Figure 1.1 presents interest rates when γ < 1 and demonstrates that in
line with the results of Section 1.2 interest rates in constrained economy are lower than in
an unconstrained one for a given consumption share y. Moreover, they become lower with
tighter constraints and are decreasing functions of constrained investor’s share of consump-
tion y. Intuitively, constrained investor invests more in bonds driving interest rates down.
Moreover, constraints prevent the investor from sharing risks eﬃciently and smoothing con-
sumption over time. As a result, when her current consumption is high the price of future
consumption increases making her more willing to lend at a lower interest causing interest
rates to fall.
40


=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Panel (b) of Figure 1.1 shows that the prices of risk are higher in the constrained than
in the unconstrained economies and increase as constraint becomes tighter.
When the
constrained investor invests only a fraction ¯θ < 1 of her wealth in the stock, for the markets
to clear investor 1 should be leveraged so that θ∗
1 > 1. This, however, implies that the
unconstrained investor should be more exposed to risk as the constraint tightens, and hence,
the market price of risk should be higher. Moreover, market price of risk also increases with
constrained investor’s consumption share y since in those states in which the unconstrained
investor consumes less and possesses less wealth she is more risk averse and requires market
prices of risk to increase for the stock market to clear. Thus, the market price of risk is
countercyclical, consistently with the empirical literature (e.g., Ferson and Harvey, 1991).
Panel (c) of Figure 1.1 demonstrates that the price-dividend ratios become lower with
tighter constraints and the eﬀect of constraints is more pronounced in states with higher
constrained investor’s consumption share y. To understand the patterns of price-dividend
ratios we ﬁrst observe that in equilibrium the price-dividend ratio can be interpreted as
the ratio of aggregate wealth over aggregate consumption since the market clearing condi-
tions (9) imply that the sock price equals aggregate wealth while the aggregate consumption
equals the dividend. As a result, the price-dividend ratio will be close to wealth-consumption
ratio of unconstrained or constrained investor depending on which of them dominates in the
market by holding larger fraction of consumption and wealth.
When the unconstrained
investor dominates (y is low), the equilibrium will be close to that in the benchmark uncon-
strained economy in which case all equilibrium parameters, including price-dividend ratios,
are constant (dotted lines in Figures 1.1 and 1.2).
However, in states with dominating
constrained investor (y is high) the price-dividend ratio is close to constrained investor’s
wealth-consumption ratio, which increases or decreases with tighter constraints depending
on the relative strength of classical income and substitution eﬀects. When the investment
opportunities worsen, the income eﬀect induces investors to decrease consumption and save
more while the substitution eﬀect induces them to consume more and save less due to
cheaper current consumption. For CRRA preferences the intertemporal elasticity of substi-
41


=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
tution (IES) equals 1/γ, the income eﬀect dominates for IES < 1 and the substitution eﬀect
dominates for IES > 1 while in the case of IES = 1 both eﬀects perfectly oﬀset each other.
With tighter constraints the investment opportunities for constrained investor worsen due to
the decline in interest rates and inability to fully beneﬁt from the increase in market prices
of risk, and hence her wealth-consumption ratios decrease for γ < 1 via the substitution
eﬀect.9 As a result, the price-dividend ratios decrease with tighter constraints and the eﬀect
is stronger in bad times, when constrained investor dominates the market and the decline
in interest rates is sharper.
The stock return volatilities on panel (d) of Figure 1.1 increase with tighter constrains
and are higher in bad times (when y is high) than in good times (when y is low). This is due
to the fact that the instantaneous changes in price-dividend ratio R and dividend δ are pos-
itively correlated due to the fact that ratio R is a decreasing function of consumption share
y, which is negatively correlated with changes in dividend δ. Consequently, since the stock
price is the product of price-dividend ratio and the dividend, stock return volatility should
be higher in constrained economy. Moreover, this eﬀect is stronger in bad times (when y is
high) due to the concavity of ratio R, and when ¯θ is low, due to the higher sensitivity of ratio
R to changes in y. Thus, for γ < 1 consistently with the empirical literature (e.g., Schwert,
1989; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999) our model generates procyclical price-dividend ratios,
countercyclical stock return volatilities exceeding the volatility of dividends, as well as nega-
tive correlation between changes in stock returns and their volatilities. Moreover, the results
on Figure 1.1 demonstrate that lower price-dividend ratios R predict higher market prices
of risk κ as well as higher risk premia (given by µ −r = κσ).
9The relation between wealth-consumption ratios and the attractiveness of investment opportunities can
conveniently be illustrated in an unconstrained partial equilibrium economy with constant interest rate r and
market price of risk κ = (µ−r)/σ, and an investor maximizing her objective (6) subject to budget constraint
(4) and no-bankruptcy constraint. It can easily be veriﬁed that when condition ρ −(1 −γ)(r + 0.5κ2/γ) > 0
is satisﬁed, the investor’s wealth-consumption ratio is given by:
W
c =
γ
ρ −(1 −γ)(r + 0.5κ2/γ),
Hence, if investment opportunities deteriorate due to decrease of r or κ, the wealth-consumption ratio
increases if the income eﬀect dominates (γ > 1) and decreases if the substitution eﬀect dominates (γ < 1).
42


=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Turning to the case γ > 1 we observe from the results shown on Figure 1.2 that the
constraints aﬀect the interest rates and market prices of risk in the same directions as in
the case γ < 1. However, by contrast with the case of γ < 1, due to the dominance of
income eﬀect, price-dividend ratios increase while stock return volatilities decrease with
tighter constraints, and the eﬀects are stronger in bad times.10 One might think that the
results in the case γ > 1 are more plausible than in the case γ < 1 given the evidence (e.g.,
Mehra and Prescott, 1985) that risk aversion is greater than unity. However, we note, that
the intuition for the dynamics of price-dividend ratios and stock return volatilities in our
model is driven by the relative strength of income and substitution eﬀect and not by the
risk aversion per se. It is well known that CARA utility does not allow to separate IES from
the risk aversion and hence, in our setting IES > 1 is necessarily associated with γ < 1.
We also note that since lower ¯θ decreases interest rates and increases market prices of
risk, irrespective of risk aversion γ, the case of restricted participation which corresponds
to ¯θ = 0 better explains the levels of observed interest rates and market prices of risk. In
particular, in our model with plausible parameters described above and γ = 3, when we set
y = 0.7 (e.g., Mankiw and Zeldes, 1991; Guvenen, 2006) we obtain r = 4.8% and κ = 28%,
while the volatilities of individual consumptions are σc1 = 9% and σc2 = 0.7%. The estimates
in Campbell (2003) show that r = 2% and κ = 36%, while Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2009) show that σc1 = 3.6% and σc2 = 1.4%. Thus, our model implies riskless
rates and market prices of risk suﬃciently close to those in the data for such a simple model.
Remark 3 (Duﬃe-Epstein preferences). The discussion above demonstrates that for
risk aversion γ < 1 the model generates empirically plausible patterns for price-dividend
ratios and stock return volatilities while for γ > 1 it generates high market prices of risk and
low interest rates close to those observed in the data. We note that the intuition for price-
dividend ratios and stock return volatilities only relies on the relative strength of income and
10In our model when γ > 1 the instantaneous volatility of stock returns is lower than that of dividend
growth and hence there is no excess volatility. Bhamra and Uppal (2009) demonstrate a signiﬁcant excess
volatility in a complete-market exchange economy with CRRA investors that diﬀer in risk aversions. Thus,
excess volatility is likely to be present in the extension of our model to the case where investors have diﬀerent
risk aversions.
43


=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
substitution eﬀects. As pointed out above, for CRRA preferences the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution (IES) equals 1/γ and hence high IES leading to the dominance of substitution
eﬀect is only possible for γ < 1. However, more general Duﬃe-Epstein recursive preferences
allow for IES independent of risk aversion parameter γ (Duﬃe and Epstein, 1992). Our
results lead to a conjecture that in a model with Duﬃe-Epstein preferences with both IES
and risk aversion exceeding unity (as in Bansal and Yaron, 2004) it might be possible to
match interest rates and market prices of risk, as well as generate procyclical price-dividend
ratios and countercyclical stock return volatilities which exceed the volatility of dividends,
consistently with the empirical literature.11
Our results also allow to obtain the expressions for consumption growth volatilities of
investors, which also capture the eﬀect of risk sharing between them. The expressions for
the volatilities can be obtained by applying Itˆo’s Lemma to optimal consumptions (48) and
are reported in the following Corollary 1.2.
Corollary 1.2.
The optimal consumption growth volatilities of unconstrained and con-
strained investors are given by
σc1t = σδ + 1
γ
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
σλt,
σc2t = σδ −1
γ
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
σλt.
(57)
It can be shown in our example that the volatility σλ is positive, and hence, consumption
volatilities in (57) imply that unconstrained investor, being exposed to more risk, has larger
volatility of consumption than the constrained one. Basak and Cuoco (1998) show in the
case of restricted participation and γ = 1 that the volatility σc2 of constrained investor
is zero and all the risk is borne by the unconstrained investor. However, in our case with
γ > 1 volatility σc2 is greater than zero, as also in the data for non-stockholders (e.g. Malloy,
Moskowitz, Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009).
11Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Chan and Kogan (2002) present the models with habit formation
and “catching up with the Joneses” preferences respectively, that explain the patterns for price-dividend
ratios and stock return volatilities.
44


=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
y
PDF
Probability Density Functions for y, T=10 years
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
5
10
15
y
PDF
Probability Density Functions for y, T=100 years
 
 
¯θ = 0
¯θ = 0.4
¯θ = 0.8
¯θ = 1
Figure 1.3: Probability Density Functions for Constrained Investor’s Share
in Aggregate Consumption, γ = 3.
The ﬁgure plots interest rates r, market prices of risk κ, price-dividend ratios R and ratios of stock
return and dividend growth volatilities σ/σδ as functions of constrained investor’s consumption share
y. Dividend mean growth rate µδ = 1.8% and volatility σδ = 3.2% are from the estimates in Campbell
(2003), based on consumption data in 1891–1998, while risk aversion and time discount are set to
γ = 3 and ρ = 0.01.
Finally, we address the question of how the constraints aﬀect the distribution of con-
sumption between the investors. So far we have compared the parameters of equilibria with
diﬀerent constraint ¯θ for a given level of consumption share y. This comparison does not
account for the fact that share y itself depends on ¯θ. Figure 1.3 shows probability density
functions of y for γ = 3, diﬀerent constraints ¯θ and time horizons equal to ten and one hun-
dred years respectively. The probability densities imply that consumption share y tends to
decline, and hence, the impact of constrained investor becomes smaller in the course of time
even though it is still signiﬁcant even after hundred years. As discussed in Hong, Kubik and
Stein (2004) stock market participation depends on person-speciﬁc characteristics such as
social integrations and education. Thus, specializing to the case of restricted participation
(¯θ = 0) our model demonstrates that these characteristics lead to gradual, although slow,
45


=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
elimination of non-stockholders’ impact on ﬁnancial markets via natural selection.12
1.4.
Extensions and Ramiﬁcations
In this Section we demonstrate that our model is extendable to diﬀerent alternative economic
settings. Section 1.4.1 extends the results of Section 1.2 to the case of heterogeneous beliefs
and provides a numerical solution to the model with CRRA investors with heterogeneous
beliefs when one of them faces short-sale constraints. Section 1.4.2 demonstrates that the
results of Section 1.2 generalize to the environments with multiple assets.
1.4.1.
Heterogeneous Beliefs Formulation
We now consider an economy in which investors are constrained and have diﬀerent beliefs
about mean dividend growth rate in the economy. We ﬁrst generalize the results of Section
1.2 and derive expressions for the parameters of equilibrium in terms of adjustments in
ﬁctitious economy and the diﬀerences in beliefs. Then, we specialize to a framework in
which both investors have identical CRRA preferences and the pessimist faces short-sale
constraints. We solve this model numerically by employing the approach of Section 1.3 and
discuss some properties of the equilibrium parameters.
Basak (2000, 2005) derives expressions for equilibrium parameters for general utility
functions in the economy in which investors face heterogeneous belief but does not study
the impact of constraints as we do in this work. Our model is also related to the model of
Gallmeyer and Holliﬁeld (2008) in which the pessimist has logarithmic preferences and faces
short-sale constraints while the investor with general CRRA is optimistic and unconstrained.
By contrast, our model does not rely on the assumption of a logarithmic constrained investor.
The economic setting is similar to that of Section 1.2. In particular, investors trade in
12In unconstrained economic settings the survival of irrational investors has been studied in Kogan, Ross,
Wang and Westerﬁeld (2004), Berrada (2009), Dumas, Kurshev and Uppal (2009) and Yan (2008), among
others. The results in the latter three works suggest that it takes a long time to eliminate the impact of
irrational investors that have wrong beliefs about mean dividend growth rates. Hugonnier (2008) considers
survival of constrained logarithmic investor and demonstrates that their impact can quickly be eliminated.
However, in his calibration the volatility of dividends is 20% while we set this parameter to the volatility
of aggregate consumption 3.2% taken from Campbell(2003). When in the calibration we choose γ = 1 and
σδ = 20% consistently with Hugonnier our results also imply fast elimination of constrained investor’s impact.
46


=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
two securities, a riskless bond and stock, and dividends follow process (1). They agree on
dividends, bond and stock prices and the dividend growth rate volatility σδ but disagree
on the growth rate µδ. Throughout this Section we will be using superscript i to denote
quantities on which investors disagree, while by subscript i investor-speciﬁc quantities on
which there is no disagreement. Investors update their beliefs µi
δt in a Bayesian fashion:
µi
δt = Ei[µδt|Fδ
t ],
i ∈{o, p},
(58)
where Ei[·] denotes the expectation under the subjective probability measure of investor
i and Fδ
t is the augmented ﬁltration generated by δt. Both investors have diﬀerent priors
µi
δ0 and investor 1 is optimistic (i = o) while investor 2 is pessimistic (i = p) about the
dividend growth. From the point of view of investor i the dividends and stock prices follow
the processes
dδt
=
δt[µi
δt + σδtdwi
t],
(59)
dSt + δtdt
=
St[µi
tdt + σtdwi
t],
(60)
where wi
t denotes Brownian motions under the subjective probability measure of investor i.
From the ﬁltering theory in Lipster and Shiryayev (1977) it follows that Brownian mo-
tions wi
t are given by
dwi
t = µδ −µi
δt
σδ
dt + dwt,
i ∈o, p.
(61)
By ∆µδt we denote the disagreement process deﬁned as
∆µδt = µo
δt −µp
δt
σδt
.
(62)
Moreover, if dividends follow geometric Brownian motion (35) and investors’ initial priors
are normally distributed with parameters
µi
δ ∼N(ˆµi
δ0, ˆσi
δ0),
then µi
δt is also normally distributed and the processes for µi
δt and ∆µδt are given by
dµi
δt
=
ˆσi
δt
σδ
dwi
t,
(63)
d∆µδt
=
−ˆσp
δt
σδ
∆µδtdt + ˆσo
δt −ˆσp
δt
σδ
dwi
t,
(64)
47


=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
where
ˆσi
δt =
ˆσi
δ0σ2
δ
ˆσi
δ0t + σ2
δ
.
(65)
The budget constraint for each investor is given by (4) in which Brownian motion w and
stock mean-return µ are replaced by investor’s subjective Brownian motion wi and mean-
return µi. Each investor solves optimization problem (6) in which now expectation operator
E[·] is replaced by operator Ei[·] under investor’s subjective beliefs, subject to the budget
constraint, no-bankruptcy constraint Wt ≥0 and portfolio constraints (5).
The equilibrium in this economy is a set of parameters {rt, µo
t, µp
t , σt} and of consumption
and investment policies {c∗
it, α∗
it, θ∗
it}i∈{o,p} which solve investor i’s dynamic optimization
problem and satisfy market clearing conditions in (9).
As in Section 1.2, the parameters of equilibrium are characterized in terms of adjustments
ν∗
i and support functions fi(ν∗
i ). We ﬁrst characterize investor’s marginal utilities in terms
of state prices that follow processes as in (14) but with Brownian motions under subjective
probability measures.
Then, we introduce the ratio of their marginal utilities λ, which
follows the process
dλt = −λt[µi
λtdt + σλtdwi
t].
(66)
By employing market clearing conditions we obtain the parameters of equilibrium. Propo-
sition 1.3 summarizes our results.
Proposition 1.3. If there exists an equilibrium, the riskless interest rate r, perceived market
prices of risk κi, drifts µi
λ and volatility σλ of weighting process (66) are given by
rt
=
¯rt −At
Aot
fo(ν∗
ot) −At
Apt
fp(ν∗
pt) −A3
t (Pot + Ppt)
2A2
otA2
pt
σ2
λt −
A3
t
AotApt
 Pot
Aot
−Ppt
Apt

δtσδtσλt
−A2
t
Apt
δtσδt∆µδt +
A2
t
AotApt
σλt∆µδt,
(67)
κo
t
=
¯κt + At
Apt
σλt,
κp
t = ¯κt −At
Aot
σλt,
(68)
µo
λt
=
Atδtσδtσλt + fo(ν∗
ot) −fp(ν∗
pt) −At
Aot
σ2
λt,
µp
λt = µo
λt −σλt∆µδt,
(69)
48


=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
σλt
=
∆µδt + ν∗
ot −ν∗
pt
σt
,
(70)
where ¯r is the riskless rate and ¯κ is the market price of risk in an unconstrained economy
populated by optimists, given by
¯rt = ρ + Atδtµo
δt −AtPt
2
δ2
t σ2
δt,
¯κt = Atδtσδt,
(71)
Ait, Pit, and At and Pt are absolute risk aversions and prudence parameters of investor i
and a representative investor with utility (19), respectively.
Expressions for optimal consumption c∗
i and stock price S are as in Proposition 1.1. Op-
timal wealths W ∗
i and optimal investment policies θ∗
i are given by expressions (26) and (28)
in which expectation operator E[·] and market prices of risk κ are replaced by subjective oper-
ator Ei[·] and price of risk κi. Initial value λ0 for weighting process (66) is such that budget
constraint at time zero (29) is satisﬁed. Moreover, adjustments ν∗
i satisfy complementary
slackness conditions (30), as in Proposition 1.1.
The expressions for interest rates in Proposition 1.3 demonstrate the impact of het-
erogeneous beliefs on interest rates and subjective market prices of risk. In particular, the
expression for interest rates have additional terms (last two terms in (67)) which demonstrate
the direct eﬀect of disagreement process ∆µδ. Since the disagreement process is positive,
its impact depends on the sign of volatility σλ. Moreover, the expression for volatility σλ in
(70) demonstrates that this parameter itself depends on ∆µδ since the disagreement aﬀects
the eﬃciency of the risk sharing, quantiﬁed by σλ. Unlike the setup of Section 1.2, investors
now disagree also on the market prices of risk, which are given in (68).
We now consider a modiﬁcation of the model in Section 1.3 in which now investors have
heterogeneous beliefs about the dividend growth rate. In particular, investor 1 is optimistic
and unconstrained while investor 2 is pessimistic and faces constraints that impose a limit
on the short-sales θ ≥θ, where θ < 0. For simplicity, as in Yan (2008) we assume that
investors do not update their beliefs and believe that dividends follow a GBM
dδt = δt[µi
δdt + σδdwi
t],
(72)
49


=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
and their diﬀerence in beliefs we denote by ∆µδ. This assumption can further be justiﬁed by
noting that under plausible parameters it takes very long time for the beliefs to converge.13
As in Section 1.3 we characterize the equilibrium in terms of the wealth-consumption
ratios of investors which satisfy HJB equations (42) in which the drift parameter µλ is now
investor-speciﬁc and should be replaced by µi
λ. Our results are summarized in Proposition
1.4.
Proposition 1.4. If there exists an equilibrium, the riskless interest rate r, perceived market
price of risk κi and drifts µi
λ of weighting process λ that follows (20) are given by
rt
=
¯r +
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
θσt(∆µδ −σλt) −1 + γ
2γ
λ1/γ
t
(1 + λ1/γ
t
)2 σ2
λt
−γ
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
σδ∆µδ +
λ1/γ
t
(1 + λ1/γ
t
)2 σλt∆µδ,
(73)
κo
t
=
¯κ +
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
σλt,
κp
t = ¯κ −
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
σλt,
(74)
µo
λt
=
γσδσλt −
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
σ2
λt −∆µδκp
t + θσt(∆µδ −σλt),
µp
λt = µo
λt −∆µδσλt, (75)
where ¯r is the riskless rate and ¯κ is the market price of risk in an unconstrained economy
populated by optimists, given by
¯r = ρ + γµo
δ −γ(1 + γ)
2
σ2
δ,
¯κ = γσδ.
(76)
Optimal consumptions c∗
i , wealths W ∗
i , stock price-dividend ratio R and optimal investment
policies θ∗
i are given by
c∗
ot
=
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
c∗
pt =
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
(77)
13In particular, assuming that investors have the same variances for the prior belief, ˆσi
δ0 = ˆσδ0, equations
for the disagreement and estimation error processes in (64) and (65) imply that
∆µδt = ∆µδ0

σ2
δ
ˆσδ0t + σ2
δ
σδ
.
Assuming further that ˆσδ0 = σδ and taking σδ = 3.2%, as in Campbell (2003), we obtain that it takes 100
years for the disagreement ∆µδ to decrease by 20%.
50


=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
W ∗
ot
=
Hot
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
W ∗
pt = Hpt
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
δt,
(78)
Rt
=
Hot
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
+ Hpt
λ1/γ
t
1 + λ1/γ
t
,
(79)
θ∗
ot
=
1
γσt

κo
t −γσλt
∂Hot
∂λt
λt
Hot

,
θ∗
pt =
1
γσt

κp
t −γσλt
∂Hpt
∂λt
λt
Hpt

,
(80)
while the volatilities of the stock returns, σ, and weighting process, σλ, are given by
σt = σδ −σλt
∂Rt
∂λt
λt
Rt
,
σλt = min
n
(1 −θ)γσδ
1
1+λ1/γ
t
+ γ ∂Hpt
∂λt
λt
Hpt −θγ ∂Rt
∂λt
λt
Rt
, ∆µδ
o
,
(81)
where wealth-consumption ratios Hot and Hpt satisfy equations (42). Moreover, the initial
value λ0 for the weighting process (20) solves equation
sHp(λ0, 0)
λ1/γ
0
1 + λ1/γ
0
δ0 −(1 −s)Ho(λ0, 0)
1
1 + λ1/γ
0
δ0 = b.
(82)
Proposition 1.4 characterizes equilibrium parameters in terms of wealth-consumption
ratios and highlights the eﬀects of heterogeneous beliefs and short-sale constraints. Crucial
diﬀerence form the results of Proposition 1.2 is that now market prices of risk (74) and
the drifts of weighting process (75) are investor-speciﬁc due to investors’ disagreement on
the dividend growth.
Moreover, the short-sale constraint will not always be binding in
equilibrium since when constrained investor’s share of aggregate consumption is large she
becomes more willing to smooth consumption over time and invests more in stock.
By calibrating our economy to plausible parameters we ﬁnd that constraints have little
eﬀect on riskless rates, while market prices of risk are investor-speciﬁc. Therefore, we here
focus on price-dividend ratios and stock return volatilities which are presented on Figure 1.4
for diﬀerent levels of θ. We here consider only the case γ > 1 and note that the case γ < 1 can
be analyzed in a similar way. The dotted lines correspond to quantities in an unconstrained
economy (θ = −∞) which are computed using explicit formula for stock prices in terms of
weighting process λ, available in Yan (2008). We assume that the optimist has correct beliefs
about mean dividend growth while the pessimist underestimates it by 40%. The ﬁrst picture
51


=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
20
25
30
35
y
R
Stock Price−Dividend Ratios (a)
 
 
θ = 0
θ = −0.5
θ = −1
θ = −∞
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
y
σ/σδ
Ratios of Stock Return and Dividend Growth Volatilities (b)
 
 
θ = 0
θ = −0.5
θ = −1
θ = −∞
Figure 1.4: Price-Dividend Ratios and Ratios of Stock Return and Dividend
Growth Volatilities with Heterogeneous Beliefs, γ > 1.
The ﬁgure plots interest rates r, market prices of risk κ, price-dividend ratios R and ratios of stock
return and dividend growth volatilities σ/σδ as functions of constrained investor’s consumption share
y. Dividend mean growth rate µδ = 1.8% and volatility σδ = 3.2% are from the estimates in Campbell
(2003), based on consumption data in 1891–1998, while risk aversion and time discount are set to
γ = 3 and ρ = 0.01.
on Figure 1.4 demonstrates that tighter short-selling constraints (higher θ) increase price-
dividend ratios. In the presence of short-sale constraints the optimist should hold less stocks
in equilibrium which decreases her perceived market price of risk. As a result, investment
opportunities deteriorate and her wealth-consumption ratio increases due to the dominance
of substitution eﬀect. Thus, when the optimist dominates in the market, the price-dividend
ratio should go up for the similar reasons as in Section 1.3. When the pessimist dominates,
the constraint does not bind and the price-dividend ratio becomes closer to that in the
unconstrained case.
It can also be observed that the price-dividend ratios on panel (a) of Figure 1.4 are U-
shaped when θ is low, even though this eﬀect is not economically signiﬁcant. To understand
the intuition, we observe that when the optimist dominates in the market, when pessimist’s
consumption and wealth share gradually increases, she shorts more in proportion of her
wealth. As a result, the optimist should hold more stocks in equilibrium which requires
higher market prices of risk, and hence, better investment opportunities. Therefore, the
income eﬀect decreases the optimist’s wealth-consumption ratio. However, as the pessimist’s
52


=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
consumption share increases further, at some point the price-dividend ratio should start
increasing again since when the pessimist dominates, the optimist’s wealth is low and she
becomes unable to hold large amount of stock. As a result, shorting becomes less attractive
for the pessimist in equilibrium and her subjective market price of risk increases pushing up
the wealth-consumption ratio and hence the price-divided ratio.
Panel (b) of Figure 1.4 demonstrates that stock return volatility can both be higher
and lower than the volatility of dividends, which is due to the U-shaped form of the price-
dividend ratio. Moreover, as short-sale constraints become tighter the volatility of stock
returns decreases for small consumption shares y, increases for medium y, and is almost
unchanged for values of y close to unity when the constraint does not bind. Intuitively,
short-sale constraints limit the ability of the pessimist to trade on her pessimism and hence
her stockholding look as if she had smaller disagreement with the unconstrained investor. As
a result, the economic parameters should become closer to the values in the unconstrained
economy without disagreement. In particular, stock return volatilities should move closer
to the volatility of dividends σδ, which we observe on Figure 1.4.
This eﬀect can also
be formally demonstrated by observing that adjustment parameters for unconstrained and
constrained investors are such that ν∗
o = 0 (case (a) in Table 1.1) and ν∗
p ≥0 (case (e)
in Table 1.1), and hence the volatility σλ given by (70) decreases towards zero since the
volatility of stock returns σ is positive. Then, from the expression for volatility σ in (81) it
follows that the diﬀerence between σ and dividend growth volatility σδ becomes smaller.
In a similar model with a logarithmic constrained pessimist Gallmeyer and Holliﬁeld
(2008) ﬁnd that the stock return volatility increases when the unconstrained optimist has
risk aversion γ > 1 and each investor is initially endowed with 50% of the market portfolio.
By contrast with their work we present the analysis of price-dividend ratios and stock
return volatilities as functions of both the pessimist’s consumption share y and the tightness
of the short-sale constraint.
Moreover, we show that the volatility σ can decrease with
tighter constraints even though the economic magnitude of this eﬀect is small. Finally, our
numerical method relies only on solving linear algebraic equations at each step rather than
53


=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
employing Monte-Carlo simulations as in their work.
1.4.2.
Multiple Stock Formulation
We now demonstrate that the baseline analysis of Section 1.2 with single stock can easily
be generalized to the case of multiple stocks. The uncertainty is now generated by a multi-
dimensional Brownian motion w = (w1, ..., wN).
The investors trade in a riskless bond
and N stocks in a positive net supply, normalized to unity, each of which is a claim to an
exogenous strictly positive stream of dividends δn following the dynamics
dδnt = δnt[µδntdt + σ⊤
δntdwt],
n = 1, ..., N,
(83)
where µδn and σδn are stochastic processes. We consider equilibria in which bond prices, B,
and stock prices, S, follow processes
dBt
=
Btrtdt
(84)
dSnt + δntdt
=
Snt[µntdt + σ⊤
ntdwt],
n = 1, ..., N.
(85)
We let µ ≡(µ1, ..., µN)⊤denote the vector of stock mean returns and σ ≡(σ1, ..., σN)⊤
the volatility matrix, assumed invertible, with each component measuring the covariance
between the stock return and Brownian motion wn. By δ we denote the process for aggregate
dividend, δ = δ1 + δ2 + ... + δN, which follows the process
dδt = δt[µδt + σ⊤
δtdwt],
(86)
where
µδt = δ1t
δt
µδ1t + ... + δNt
δt
µδNt,
σδt = δ1t
δt
σδ1t + ... + δNt
δt
σδNt.
Investor 1 is endowed with sn units of stock n and −b units of bond, while investor 2 is
endowed with 1 −sn units of stock n and b units of bond. Investor i’s wealth process W
follows
dWit =
h
Wit

rt + θ⊤
it(µt −rt)

−cit
i
dt + Witθ⊤
itσtdwt,
(87)
and her investment policies are subject to portfolio constraints
θi ∈Θi,
i = 1, 2,
(88)
54


=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
where Θi is a closed convex set in RN and θ = (θ1, ..., θN)⊤is the vector of wealth proportions
invested in the N stocks. Each investor i solves her dynamic optimization (6) subject to
budget constraint (87), no-bankruptcy constraint Wt ≥0 and portfolio constraints (88).
Following the approach of Section 1.2 we ﬁrst embed the optimization problem for each
investor into an equivalent ﬁctitious complete-market economy in which stock prices evolve
as
dξit = −ξit[ritdt + κ⊤
itdwt].
(89)
Assuming that dual problems in Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992) have solutions we obtain that
riskless rates rit and market prices of risk κit in ﬁctitious economy are given by
rit = rt + fi(ν∗
it),
κit = κt + σ−1
t ν∗
it,
(90)
where κ is the market price of risk in the original economy, fi(ν) are support functions for
the sets Θi, deﬁned as
fi(ν) = sup
θ∈Θi
(−ν⊤θ),
(91)
ν∗
1t and ν∗
2t solve duality optimization problem in Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992) and belong
to the eﬀective domains for support functions, given by
Υi = {ν ∈RN : fi(ν) < ∞}.
(92)
Proposition 1.5 characterizes the equilibrium in terms of the adjustments ν∗
it and f(ν∗
it)
in ﬁctitious economies and the parameters of the process for the ratio of marginal utilities
of consumption, λt, which evolves as
dλt = −λt[µλtdt + σ⊤
λtdwt].
(93)
Proposition 1.5. If there exists an equilibrium, the riskless interest rate r, market price
of risk κ, drift µλ and volatility σλ of weighting process λ that follows (93) are given by
rt = ¯rt−At
A1t
f1(ν∗
1t)−At
A2t
f2(ν∗
2t)−A3
t (P1t + P2t)
2A2
1tA2
2t
σ⊤
λtσλt−
A3
t
A1tA2t
 P1t
A1t
−P2t
A2t

δtσ⊤
δtσλt,
(94)
55


=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
κt
=
¯κt −At
A1t
σ−1
t ν∗
1t −At
A2t
σt−1ν∗
2t,
(95)
µλt
=
Atδtσ⊤
δtσλt + f1(ν∗
1t) −f2(ν∗
2t) −At
A1t
σ⊤
λtσλt,
σλt = σ−1
t (ν∗
1t −ν∗
2t),
(96)
where ¯r is the riskless rate and ¯κ is the market price of risk in an unconstrained economy,
given by
¯rt = ρ + Atδtµδt −AtPt
2
δ2
t σ⊤
δtσδt,
¯κt = Atδtσδt,
(97)
Ait, Pit, and At and Pt are absolute risk aversions and prudence parameters of investor i and
a representative investor with utility (19), respectively. Optimal consumptions c∗
i , wealths
Wi and optimal investment policies θ∗
i are given by
c∗
it
=
gi(δt, λt),
(98)
W ∗
it
=
1
ξit
Et
hZ ∞
0
ξisc∗
isds
i
,
(99)
θ∗
it
=
σ−1
t

W ∗
it(κt + σ−1
t ν∗
it) + φit
ξit

,
(100)
where functions gi(δt, λt) are such that c∗
1t and c∗
2t satisfy consumption clearing in (9) and
equation (18) for process λ, state prices ξit follow processes (14) and φi are such that
Mit ≡Et
hZ ∞
0
ξisc∗
isds
i
= Mi0 +
Z t
0
φ⊤
isdws.
Initial value λ0 is such that budget constraints at time 0 are satisﬁed:
si1S10 + ... + siNSN0 + bi = W ∗
i0,
(101)
where s1n = sn, s2n = 1 −sn, b1 = −b and b2 = b. Moreover, adjustments ν∗
it satisfy
complementary slackness condition
fi(ν∗
it) + θ∗⊤
it ν∗
it = 0.
(102)
The expression for interest rates (94) can again be decomposed into three groups of terms
that represent riskless rate in an unconstrained economy, the impact of constraints and the
eﬀect of risk sharing. The last term in (94) also shows that in the case of heterogeneous
56


=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
utility functions the interest rates depend on the covariance between aggregate dividend and
weighting process λ, captured by σ⊤
δ σλ. The expression for equilibrium interest rates also
allows to formulate a simple suﬃcient condition under which the equilibrium interest rates
in the constrained economy are lower than in the unconstrained one.
Corollary 1.3. If the utility functions and the allocations of consumption are such that
P1/A1 = P2/A2 and the sets of portfolio constraints Θi contain the origin, i.e. 0 ∈Θi, then
the interest rate in a constrained economy, r, is lower than in an unconstrained one, ¯r, and
the following upper bound for rate r holds:
rt ≤¯rt −A3
t (P1t + P2t)
2A2
1tA2
2t
σ⊤
λ σλ.
(103)
The expressions for the market price of risk now reﬂect the impact of multiple constraints.
By contrast with the single stock case, market clearing conditions can only determine the
aggregate value of all stocks and not the values of individual ones. Moreover, as demon-
strated in Hugonnier (2008) if the weighting process is not a martingale then there might
be multiple equilibria with diﬀerent stock prices but unique riskless rates and market prices
of risk. The application of the methodology developed in Section 1.3 for ﬁnding equilibria
in a multi-stock economy we leave for the future research.
1.5.
Conclusion
Despite numerous applications of dynamic equilibrium models with heterogeneous investors
facing portfolio constraints, little is known about the equilibrium when we depart from the
assumption of logarithmic preferences. In various frameworks we provide explicit expres-
sions for interest rates and market prices of risk in terms of instantaneous volatilities of
stock returns and consumptions as well as risk aversions and prudence parameters. We then
consider an economic setting where one investor is unconstrained while the other faces up-
per bound on the proportion that can be invest in stocks, and both investors have identical
CRRA utilities. We completely characterize the equilibrium in terms of investors’ wealth-
57


=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
consumption ratios satisfying a pair of diﬀerential equations that we solve numerically by
employing a simple iterative algorithm. We further demonstrate that the direction in which
portfolio constraints change price-dividend ratios and stock returns volatilities crucially de-
pends on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). In particular, when the IES is
greater than unity the model generates countercyclical market prices of risk and stock return
volatilities, procyclical price-dividend ratios, excess volatility and other patterns consistent
with empirical ﬁndings. We also ﬁnd that the impact of constrained investor diminishes in
the course of time but is still signiﬁcant even after one hundred years. Our approach is then
extended to the case of heterogeneous beliefs and multiple assets. Given the tractability of
our analysis we believe that our approach for ﬁnding equilibria in economies with constraints
may ﬁnd applications in various models with heterogeneous investors and incomplete ﬁnan-
cial markets as well as in solving portfolio choice problems with constraints at a partial
equilibrium level.
58


=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
1.6.
Appendix A: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1.1.
First, we obtain a system of equations for parameters of
the ﬁctitious economy by substituting the expressions for optimal consumption (17) into
consumption clearing condition in (9), applying Itˆo’s Lemma to both sides and matching
the coeﬃcients. Noting from the properties of inverse functions that
I′
i(ψieρtξit) =
1
u′
i(c∗
it),
I′′
i (ψieρtξit) = −u′′
i (c∗
it)
u′
i(c∗
it)
1
(u′
i(c∗
it))2 ,
we obtain the following equations
rt −ρ
At
+ f1(ν∗
1t)
A1t
+ f2(ν∗
2t)
A2t
+ 1
2

P1t
 κ1t
A1t
2
+ P2t
 κ2t
A2t
2
=
δtµδt,
(104)
κ1t
A1t
+ κ2t
A2t
=
δtσδt.
(105)
By applying Itˆo’s Lemma to both sides of the deﬁnition of λ in (18) and noting that marginal
utilities u′
i(c∗
i ) are given by (16), matching the terms we obtain the drift µλ and volatility
σλ of the weighting process (20):
µλt = σλtκ2t + f1(ν∗
1t) −f2(ν∗
2t),
σλt = κ1t −κ2t.
(106)
Taking into account the deﬁnition of κit in terms of adjustments in (15) from equations
(104)–(106) we obtain expressions (21)–(23) in Proposition 1.1.
Analogously, it can be
shown that in the unconstrained economy the interest rate is given by (24).
Optimal consumptions c∗
it are obtained from consumption clearing and the equation for
weight λ in (18). Expressions for optimal wealths and optimal policy (26) and (28) follow
from the results in Cox and Huang (1989), Huang and Pages (1992) and Karatzas and
Shreve (1998), while stock prices (3) are derived from the market clearing conditions in (9).
The complementary slackness condition in (30) is established in Chapter 6.3 of Karatzas
and Shreve (1998).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 1.1.
The proof directly follows from Proposition 1.1 by noting that
the last term in the expression for r in (21) disappears.
Q.E.D.
59


=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Proof of Proposition 1.2.
We obtain expressions (44)–(48) for equilibrium parameters
from expressions (21)–(25) in Proposition 1.1 by substituting adjustment parameters (39)
and risk-aversion and prudence parameters for CRRA preferences, given by
A1t
=
γ
c1t
,
A2t
=
γ
c2t
,
At
=
γ
δt
,
P1t
=
1 + γ
c1t
,
P2t
=
1 + γ
c2t
,
Pt
=
1 + γ
δt
.
(107)
We ﬁrst demonstrate that the constraint for investor 2 should always be binding in
equilibrium. The complementary slackness condition (30), given expressions for adjustments
(39), takes the form (¯θ −θ∗
2t)ν∗
2t = 0. Therefore, if constraint does not bind it follows that
ν∗
2t = 0.
Hence, from (23) we obtain that σλt = 0 and µλt = 0 and the economy will
permanently remain in a Pareto-eﬃcient unconstrained equilibrium. As a result, since the
investors have identical preferences and the equilibrium investment opportunity sets are
constant when σλt = 0 and µλt = 0, it can easily be veriﬁed that the investors will choose
θ∗
it = 1, which violates constraint θ2t ≤¯θ < 1. Therefore, the constraint should always be
binding in equilibrium.
Expressions for wealths W ∗
it follow from the ﬁrst order condition for consumption in (41),
while the expression for price-dividend ratio R follows from the expression for stock price
(3), derived from consumption clearing, and the expressions for wealths in (49). Optimal
policy for investor 1, θ∗
1t, in (51) is obtained by solving an HJB equation, while policy for
investor 2 equals ¯θ since the investor always binds on her constraint, as demonstrated below.
Stock return volatility σ in (52) is derived by applying Itˆo’s Lemma to stock price, given by
St = Rtδt.
From the deﬁnition of κit in (15), expression for κt in (45) and expressions for adjustments
in (39) we ﬁnd that
κ2t = γσδ −
1
1 + λ1/γ
t
σλ.
(108)
Substituting κ2t from (108) into expression for optimal investment policy (43) and noting
60


=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
that constraint θ2t ≤¯θ is always binding we obtain the following equation for σλ:
1
γσt

γσδ −σλt

1
1 + λ1/γ
t
+ γ ∂H2t
∂λt
λt
H2t

= ¯θ.
(109)
Substituting volatility σ given by ﬁrst expression in (52) into equation (109) and solving
it yields σλ given by second expression in (52). Finally, the equation for λ0 is obtained
so as to satisfy time-0 budget constraints (29). By substituting W ∗
10, W ∗
20 and S0 = R0δ0
from Proposition 1.2 into the budget constraints (29) it can easily be observed that both
constraints are satisﬁed whenever equation (53) for λ0 holds.14
Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 1.2.
Applying Itˆo’s Lemma to both sides of the ﬁrst order conditions
for consumption (16) and matching the terms we ﬁnd that
citσcit = κit
Ait
.
(110)
Since investor 1 is unconstrained, κ1 = κ and is given by (45) while κ2 is given by (108).
Substituting κ1 and κ2 into (110) and noting that for CRRA utility Ai = γ/ci we obtain
expressions (57) for volatilities σci.
Q.E.D.
14We also note that the results of Proposition 1.2 can be derived without relying on the methodology
in Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992) by solving the HJB for investor 2 directly in constrained economy. Since
the constraint is always binding the problem is equivalent to the one with constraint θ2t = ¯θ. The HJB
equation is then given by (38) in which θ2t = ¯θ and ν∗
it = 0, since we solve in constrained economy. Then,
conjecturing that J2t has form (40) yields the equation for H2t. From the ﬁrst order condition (41) we obtain
e−ρtW −γ
2t Hγ
2t = ξ2t, where ξ2t is the marginal utility of investor 2 which follows the process (14). Applying
Itˆo’s Lemma to both sides shows that
¯θσt = κ2t
γ
−σλt ∂H2t
∂λt
λt
H2t .
Substituting this expression into HJB after some algebra we obtain equation (42) for investor 2. Price of risk
κ2 can be found from (105)–(106) while r2 can be found by applying Itˆo’s Lemma to ξ2tW2t = e−ρtW 1−γ
2t
Hγ
2t,
noting that the right-hand side satisﬁes HJB equation, θ2t = ¯θ, and matching the terms.
Moreover, since investor 1 faces complete market, in the derivation of rt and κt to obtain equations
(104)–(105) we assume that u′(c∗
1t) = ψ1eρtξ1t where
ξ1t = −ξ1t[rtdt + κtdwt].
Huang and Pages (1992) derive this result assuming that
R t
0 |rτ|dτ < ∞a.s., and κt < ¯K a.s., where ¯K
is a constant.
It is diﬃcult to check these conditions analytically.
However, the graphs on Figure 1.3
demonstrate that the states with y close to 1, where rt and κt are unbounded, have zero probability, and
hence, the conditions are likely to be satisﬁed. We also check numerically that the integrals in investor’s
optimization (6) converge to Jit derived in Section 1.3.
61


=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Proof of Proposition 1.3.
From expression (61) we ﬁrst express Brownian motion wp
in terms of Brownian motion wo as follows:
dwp
t = ∆µδtdt + dwo
t ,
(111)
and then rewrite all subsequent stochastic processes in terms of Brownian motion wo under
the optimist’s probability measure.
Then, state prices ξit in ﬁctitious economies follow
processes:
dξot = −ξot[rotdt + κo
tdwo
t ],
dξpt = −ξpt[(rpt + ∆µδtκp
t )dt + κp
t dwo
t ].
(112)
Optimal consumptions in ﬁctitious economies are given by (17). Substituting them into
consumption clearing condition in (9), applying Itˆo’s Lemma to both sides and matching
terms as in the proof of Proposition 1.1 after some algebra we obtain:
rt −ρ
At
+ fo(ν∗
ot)
Aot
+ fp(ν∗
pt)
Apt
+ 1
2

Pot
 κo
t
Aot
2
+ Ppt
 κp
t
Apt
2
=
κo
t
Aot
µo
δt
σδt
+ κp
t
Apt
µp
δt
σδt
,(113)
κo
t
Aot
+ κp
t
Apt
=
δtσδt.
(114)
By applying Itˆo’s Lemma to both sides of the deﬁnition of λ in (18) and noting that marginal
utilities u′
i(c∗
i ) are given by (16) and state prices follow (112), matching the terms we obtain
the drift µλ and volatility σλ of the weighting process (66) for the optimist:
µo
λt = σλtκp
t −∆µδtκp
t + fo(ν∗
ot) −fp(ν∗
pt),
σλt = κo
t −κp
t .
(115)
Using equations (113), (114) and the second equation in (115) we obtain expressions for r
and κ in Proposition 1.3.
To obtain drift µp
λt we rewrite the process for λt given by (66) under the Brownian
motion of the optimist as follows
dλt = −λt[(µp
λt + σλt∆µδt)dt + σλtdwo
t ].
Matching the drift parameters for the processes for λt from both optimist’s and pessimist’s
points of view yields expression for µp
λt in Proposition 1.3. To obtain expression for σλ we
62


=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
note ﬁrst that by the deﬁnition of prices of risk in ﬁctitious economies
κo
t = µo
t −rt
σt
+ νo
it
σt
,
κp
t = µp
t −rt
σt
+ νp
it
σt
.
(116)
Moreover, rewriting the process for stock prices St for both the optimist and pessimist in
terms of Brownian motion wo
dSt
=
St[µo
tdt + σtdwo
t ]
=
St[(µp
t + ∆µδtσt)dt + σtdwo
t ],
and matching the terms we obtain
µo
t −µp
t
σt
= ∆µδt.
(117)
The expression for σλ in (115) along with equations (116) and (117) gives σλ reported in
Proposition 1.3. The rest of the proof is as in Proposition 1.1.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 1.4.
From the deﬁnition of the support function in (12) applied
to θ ≥θ and the expression (70) for volatility σλ we obtain the adjustment parameters:
ν∗
1t = 0,
f(ν∗
1t) = 0,
ν∗
2t = σt(∆µδt −σλt),
f(ν∗
2t) = −θσt(∆µδt −σλt).
(118)
Substituting adjustments (118) and risk-aversion and prudence parameters in (107), into the
expressions (67)–(71) we obtain equilibrium parameters (73)–(76) reported in Proposition
1.4.
Consumptions (77) are obtained from the consumption clearing condition in (9) and
deﬁnition of λt in (18). Wealth-consumption ratios Ho and Hp satisfy HJB equations (42)
in which µλ is replaced by µo
λ and µp
λ respectively. Hence, from the ﬁrst order condition
for consumption in (41) and market clearing condition we obtain expressions for W ∗
it and
Rt. Expressions for optimal policies are obtained by solving HJB equations in ﬁctitious
economies, as in Section 1.3, while stock return volatility σ is obtained by applying Itˆo’s
Lemma to stock price St = Rtδt.
The complementary slackness condition in (30) in our setting takes the form (θ−θ∗
it)ν∗
it =
0. As a result, if constraint is not binding ν∗
it = 0, and hence, from the expression in (70) it
63


=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
follows that σλ = ∆µδt. To solve for σλ when the constraint is binding we ﬁrst substitute
κp from (74) into the investment policy (80) and obtain
θ∗
pt =
1
γσt

γσδ −σλt

1
1 + λ1/γ
t
+ γ ∂Hp
t
∂λt
λt
Hp
t

.
(119)
Then, substituting σ from (81) into (119) and solving equation θ∗
pt = θ we obtain
σλt =
(1 −θ)γσδ
1
1+λ1/γ
t
+ γ ∂Hpt
∂λt
λt
Hpt −θγ ∂Rt
∂λt
λt
Rt
.
(120)
Moreover, since ν∗
2t ≥0 (Table 1.1 case (e)) if the constraint binds σλ is given by (120) and
should be lower than ∆µδt which leads to expression for σλ in Proposition 1.4.15
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 1.5.
The proof is a multi-dimensional version of the proof of
Proposition 1.1.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 1.3.
From the deﬁnition of support functions in (12) it follows easily
that fi(ν) ≥0 if 0 ∈Θi. Then, the proof follows from the fact that in the expression for
interest rates r in Proposition 1.5 the second and third terms are positive while the last
term vanishes.
Q.E.D.
15Similarly to the discussion in the footnote in the proof of Proposition 1.2 it can be argued that the results
in Proposition 1.4 can be obtained without relying on the methodology in Cvitanic and Karatzas (1992).
64


=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
1.7.
Appendix B: Numerical Method
We here present the details of our numerical solution method in Section 1.3 ﬁrst for γ > 1
and then for γ < 1. Since variable λ takes values in the interval (0, +∞) we ﬁrst rewrite
the HJB equations (42) in terms of variable y = λ1/γ/(1 + λ1/γ). By ˜Hi(y, t) we denote the
wealth-consumption ratios as functions of y so that
Hi(λ, t) = ˜Hi(y(λ), t).
(121)
The derivatives of Hi(λ, t) then can be expressed in terms of derivatives of ˜Hi(y, t) by
diﬀerentiating both sides in (121) as follows:
∂Hit
∂t
=
∂˜Hit
∂t ,
λt
∂Hit
∂λt
= y(1 −y)
γ
∂˜Hit
∂y ,
(122)
λ2
t
∂2Hit
∂λ2
t
=
y2(1 −y)2
γ2
∂2Hit
∂y2
+ 2y(1 −y)((1 −γ)/2 −y)
γ2
∂˜Hit
∂y .
(123)
Taking into account our change of variable and the expressions for derivatives in (122)–
(123) from the expressions in Proposition 1.2, deﬁnitions of parameters rit and κit in (15),
and expressions for adjustment parameters in (39) we obtain the following expressions for
equilibrium parameters in ﬁctitious economies:
r1t
=
¯r −
y
1 −y
¯θσtσyt −1 + γ
2γ
y
1 −yσ2
yt,
κ1t = γσδ +
y
1 −yσyt,
r2t
=
¯r + ¯θσtσyt −1 + γ
2γ
y
1 −yσ2
yt,
κ2t = γσδ −σyt,
µλt
=
µyt
1 −y,
σλt =
σyt
1 −y
(124)
where ¯r is given by (47), µyt, σt and σyt are given by
µyt = γσδσyt−¯θσtσyt−σ2
yt,
σt = σδ−σyt
γ
∂˜Rt
∂yt
yt
˜Rt
,
σyt =
(1 −¯θ)γσδ
1 + ∂˜H2t
∂yt
yt
˜H2t −¯θ ∂˜Rt
∂yt
yt
˜Rt
, (125)
and ˜Rt is a price-dividend ratio as a function of y. Substituting expressions for derivatives
(122) and (123) into the HJB equations (42) we obtain the following PDEs for ˜Hit:
∂˜Hit
∂t
+ y2
t σ2
yt
2γ2
∂2 ˜Hit
∂y2
t
+ yt
γ2

σ2
yt
(1 −γ)/2 −yt
1 −yt
−γµyt −(1 −γ)κitσyt
∂˜Hit
∂yt
+ 1
γ
1 −γ
2γ κ2
it + (1 −γ)rit −ρ

˜Hit + 1 = 0,
i = 1, 2.
(126)
65


=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
To ﬁnd stationary, time-independent solutions of equations (126) we ﬁx a large horizon T,
pick two functions ˜h1(y) and ˜h2(y), specify terminal condition
˜Hi(y, T) = ˜hi(y),
i = 1, 2,
(127)
and solve HJB equations (126) backwards until the convergence to stationary solutions. We
assume that functions ˜hi are continuous and diﬀerentiable on the interval [0, 1] and satisfy
conditions ˜h1(1) = 0 and ˜h′
2(1) = (γ −1)˜h2(1).
We assume that ˜Hi(y, t) are twice continuously diﬀerentiable in the interval (0, 1), have
bounded ﬁrst and second right derivatives at y = 0, σ2
y > 0, and there exist limits (1 −
y)2∂2 ˜H1(y, t)/∂y2 →0, (1 −y)∂2 ˜H2(y, t)/∂y2 →0 and (1 −y)∂˜H1(y, t)/∂y →0, as y →
1. After we compute the solutions we also verify numerically that these assumptions are
satisﬁed for γ > 1.
Passing to the limit y →0 in equations (126) we obtain simple ordinary diﬀerential
equations for Hi(0, t) solving which yields boundary conditions at y = 0:
˜Hi(0, t) = ˜hi(0)epi(T−t) + epi(T−t) −1
pi
,
i = 1, 2,
(128)
where
p1 = 1 −γ
2
¯θ2σ2
δ + (1 −γ)¯r −ρ
γ
,
p2 = 1 −γ
2
σ2
δ + (1 −γ)¯r −ρ
γ
.
(129)
Expressions in (128) and (129) demonstrate that conditions pi ≤0 are necessary for the
existence of stationary solutions of equations (126). To obtain boundary conditions at y = 1
we multiply the equations for H1(y, t) and H2(y, t) by (1−y)2 and (1−y), respectively, and
passing to the limit y →1 we obtain:
(1 −¯θ)(γ −1) ˜H1(1, t) = 0,
∂˜H2(1, t)
∂y
= (γ −1) ˜H2(1, t).
(130)
The problem then becomes to solve HJB equations (126) subject to terminal condition (127)
and boundary conditions (128) and (130).
For simplicity, in the description of the numerical method we omit subscript i.
We
let the time and state variable increments denote ∆t ≡T/M and ∆y ≡1/N, where M
66


=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
and N are integer numbers, and index time and state variables by t = 0, ∆t, 2∆t, ..., T and
y = 0, ∆y, 2∆y, ..., 1, respectively. Next, we derive discrete-time analogues of HJB equations
and boundary conditions replacing derivatives by their ﬁnite-diﬀerence analogues as follows:
˜Hn,k+1 −˜Hn,k
∆t
+an,k+1
˜Hn+1,k −2 ˜Hn,k + ˜Hn−1,k
∆y2
+bn,k+1
˜Hn,k −˜Hn−1,k
∆y
+cn,k+1 ˜Hn,k+1 = 0,
(131)
˜Hn,M = ˜hn,
˜H0,k = d0,k,
˜HN,k = eN,k ˜HN−1,k,
(132)
where n = 1, 2, ..., N −1, k = 1, 2, ..., M −1, ˜Hn,k = ˜H(n∆y, k∆t). The coeﬃcients in (131)
correspond to coeﬃcients in equation (126) and are computed using the solution ˜Hn,k+1,
while coeﬃcients in (131) are obtained by replacing terminal condition (127) and boundary
conditions (128) and (130) by their ﬁnite-diﬀerence analogues. The system of equations in
(131)–(132) is then solved backwards in time, starting at k = M −1. Given solution Hn,k+1
we compute all the coeﬃcients in (131) at step k + 1, and hence at step k function Hn,k for
ﬁxed k solves a system of linear algebraic equations. We then iterate backwards until the
process converges to a stationary time-independent solution.
Figure 1.1 shows the numerical solutions for wealth-consumption ratios plotted against
constrained investors share of consumption, y, for plausible exogenous parameters. These
numerical solutions have the appearance of bounded and twice continuously diﬀerentiable
on interval [0, 1] functions irrespective of the grid parameter ∆y.
Assuming that they
are indeed twice continuously diﬀerentiable, and given that they satisfy ﬁnite-diﬀerence
equations (131)–(132), passing to a limit ∆y →0 indeed gives solutions to the HJB equations
for wealth-consumption ratios.16
When risk aversion γ is less than unity wealth-consumption ratio H1t and its derivatives
become unbounded while σyt approaches zero, as y approaches unity.
As a result, the
assumptions under which the boundary conditions (128) and (130) are derived are violated.
However, it turns out that function (1 −y)H1t is bounded and equals zero when y = 1.
16As an additional check we also verify by Monte-Carlo simulations that for both investors integrals in
their optimization problem (6) do not explode under optimal consumption policies in (48) and converge
to the values obtained by our numerical method. The convergence of those integrals also implies that the
transversality conditions for HJB equations (38) are satisﬁed.
67


=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
Chapter 1: Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium with Constraints
Hence, we derive the diﬀerential equation for (1 −y)H1t and solve it using the methodology
described above.
The model with heterogeneous beliefs in Section 1.4.1 is solved in a similar way. First,
we derive an HJB equation in terms of consumption share y, which is given by (126) in which
µy is replaced by µi
y. Then, we obtain boundary conditions and solve the ﬁnite-diﬀerence
equations numerically.
68


=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
2.
Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
2.1.
Introduction
The mean-variance analysis of Markowitz (1952) has long been recognized as the cornerstone
of modern portfolio theory. Its simplicity and intuitive appeal have led to its widespread
use in both academia and industry. Originally cast in a single-period framework, the mean-
variance paradigm has no doubt also inspired the development of the multi-period portfolio
choice literature. To this day, the mean-variance criteria are employed in many multi-period
problems by ﬁnancial economists, but typically for a myopic investor, who in each period
maximizes her next-period objective (e.g., among others, Ait-Sahalia and Brandt, 2001;
Campbell and Viceira, 2002; Jagannathan and Ma, 2003; Bansal, Dahlquist and Harvey,
2004; Acharya and Pedersen, 2005; Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong, 2006; Brandt, 2009;
Campbell, Serfaty-de Medeiros and Viceira, 2009).17 While the myopic assumption allows
analytical tractability and abstracts away from dynamic hedging considerations, there is
growing evidence that intertemporal hedging demands may comprise a signiﬁcant part of
the total risky asset demand (e.g., Campbell and Viceira, 1999; Brandt, 1999).
However, solving the dynamic asset-allocation problem with mean-variance criteria has
had mixed success to date. A major obstacle has been the inability to directly apply the
traditional dynamic programming approach due to the failure of the iterated-expectations
property for mean-variance objectives.
A growing recent literature tackles this by just
characterizing the optimal policy chosen at an initial date, by either employing martingale
methods or tractable auxiliary problems in complete market settings (as discussed below).
However, due to the time-inconsistency of the mean-variance criteria, the investor may ﬁnd it
optimal to deviate from this policy unless she is able to pre-commit, and henceforth we refer
17We acknowledge the well-known theoretical objections to the mean-variance criteria if interpreted as
investors’ preferences, namely admitting potentially negative terminal wealth, increasing absolute risk aver-
sion, and potentially non-monotonicity of preferences. Despite the theoretical limitations, the mean-variance
criteria remain relatively popular in practice and academia due to their simplicity and tractability, which
we will also demonstrate in our analysis. Interestingly, recent evidence in neuroscience, as provided and dis-
cussed by Bossaerts, Preuschoﬀ, and Quartz (2006, 2008), suggests that the human brain appears to analyze
risky gambles by considering variance and expectation separately, consistent with the mean-variance criteria.
69


=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
to it as the pre-commitment policy. Nevertheless, time-consistency is a basic requirement
of rational decision making, and as Strotz (1956) in his original work on time-consistent
plans puts it: an investor should choose “... the best plan among those that he will actually
follow.” Many decades have passed since the original Markowitz analysis, and yet we still
lack a comprehensive treatment of dynamically optimal policies consistent with the mean-
variance criteria.
In this paper, we solve the dynamic asset allocation problem of a mean-variance optimizer
in an incomplete-market setting, and provide a simple, tractable solution for the risky stock
holdings. To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst to obtain within a general environment a fully
analytical characterization of the dynamically optimal mean-variance policies, from which
the investor has no incentive to deviate, namely, the time-consistent policies.
Towards
this, we consider the familiar multi-period asset allocation problem of an investor, who has
preferences over terminal wealth and dynamically allocates wealth between a risky stock and
a riskless bond. The investor is guided by the mean-variance criterion, linearly trading-oﬀ
mean and variance of terminal wealth. Our setting is a continuous-time Markovian economy
with stochastic investment opportunities, allowing for a potentially incomplete market. Our
solution method for the determination of optimal dynamic mean-variance policies is based
on the derivation of a recursive formulation so that dynamic programming can be employed.
This recursive derivation is complicated by the fact that mean-variance criteria in a multi-
period setting result in time-inconsistency of investment policies, in that the investor has
an incentive to deviate from an initial policy at a later date. The intuition for this is that
sitting at a point in time, the mean-variance investor perceives the variability of terminal
wealth to be higher than the anticipated variability at a future date.
To address this
problem, we decompose the investor’s conditional objective function as her expected future
objective plus a term accounting for the incentives to deviate, which then leads to the desired
recursive formulation. This in turn allows us to employ dynamic programming, derive the
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, and obtain an analytical solution to the problem.
Our recursive approach is the one originally suggested by Strotz (1956), although the same
70


=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
solution can alternatively be obtained as the Nash equilibrium outcome of an intra-personal
game by the dynamic mean-variance investor, similarly to the literature on consumer choice
with time-inconsistent preferences (e.g., Peleg and Yaari, 1973; Harris and Laibson, 2001).18
The optimal stock investment policy of a dynamic mean-variance optimizer has a simple
structure, being comprised of familiar myopic and intertemporal hedging terms. The novel
feature of our case is that we identify the hedging demand to be driven by the expected total
gains or losses from the stock investments over the investment horizon, in contrast to being
driven by the value function in the extant literature. This is because the mean-variance
value function is linear in wealth. Since the conditional variance of terminal wealth equals
that of future portfolio gains, the mean-variance hedging demands are determined by the
anticipated portfolio gains. The economic role of the hedging demands in our setting is then
straightforward: when the stock return is negatively related to the anticipated portfolio
gains, the gains in one oﬀset the losses in the other. This leads to a lower variability of
wealth, making the stock more attractive, and hence inducing a positive hedging demand;
and vise versa for a negative hedging demand. We then identify a unique probability mea-
sure, labeled a “hedge-neutral” measure, which absorbs the hedging demands so that the
anticipated investment gains under this measure look as if the investor were myopic. This
representation under the new measure facilitates considerable tractability, allowing one to
easily determine the mean-variance portfolios explicitly or otherwise perform Monte-Carlo
simulation straightforwardly. Moreover, given our dynamically optimal mean-variance pol-
icy, it is possible to recover time-consistent objective functions that would lead to the same
policy (Remark 1). One such function is an increasing, concave, state-dependent criterion
of CARA form, a result also generalizing the well-known equivalence of mean-variance and
CARA optimization in a one-period Gaussian setting.
We also ﬁnd the dynamic mean-variance policies to inherit a number of conventional
18The dynamic inconsistency of preferences is common in economic settings with non-exponential dis-
counting and changing preferences. A growing literature emphasizes the importance of time-inconsistency
by demonstrating that it signiﬁcantly aﬀects consumption and investment decisions of individuals (Harris
and Laibson, 2001; Grenadier and Wang, 2007; Ekeland and Lazrak, 2008; Kihlstrom, 2008).
71


=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
properties of single-period models, such as, the higher the stock volatility, bond interest rate
or investor risk aversion, the lower the stock investment (in absolute terms). However, these
dynamic policies also generate rich implications related to the eﬀects of investment hori-
zon, market price of risk, and market incompleteness. For example, the variance of terminal
wealth in incomplete markets is higher than that in complete markets, and consequently the
mean-variance investor with positive hedging demand is worse oﬀin incomplete markets. We
also compare our time-consistent solution to the mean-variance pre-commitment solution
in a simple complete market settings. The mean-variance investor under pre-commitment
maximizes her initial objective and pre-commits to that initial investment policy, not de-
viating at subsequent times. We demonstrate that the time-consistent investment policy,
obtained via dynamic programming, is generically diﬀerent from the pre-commitment pol-
icy, obtained via martingale methods.
Although for very short investment horizons the
pre-commitment solution approximates the time-consistent one up to second order terms,
for plausible horizons, the two solutions can diﬀer considerably. Of course, with standard
utility functions, the two solutions are well-known to coincide (Karatzas and Shreve, 1998).
We illustrate the practical usefulness of our analysis by considering the dynamic mean-
variance problem under several stochastic investment opportunities that have been studied
in the literature for other preference speciﬁcations. In particular, we specialize our eco-
nomic setting to the constant elasticity of variance model in a complete market (Cox and
Ross, 1976; Schroder, 1989), a mean-reverting stochastic-volatility model in an incomplete
market (Liu, 2001; Chacko and Viceira, 2005; Heston, 1993), and a time-varying Gaus-
sian mean-returns model in an incomplete market (Kim and Omberg, 1998; Campbell and
Viceira, 1999; Wachter, 2002). In all these applications, we explicitly derive the dynamic
mean-variance portfolios as a straightforward exercise, by computing the anticipated gains
process under the hedge-neutral measure, which amounts to evaluating the expectation of
the squared market price of risk. We emphasize that our computations do not resort to
solving an HJB PDE for the investor’s value function, as would be the case for other popu-
lar objective speciﬁcations. In addition to providing further insights, our explicit solutions
72


=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
allow us to assess the economic signiﬁcance of the intertemporal hedging demands of a
mean-variance optimizer.
Speciﬁcally, we compute the percentage hedging demand over
total demand in our richer incomplete market settings for a range of plausible parameter
values. We ﬁnd our results to be in line with those in the literature and show that the
percentage hedging demand can be considerable in some economic settings, ranging from
18% to 84%, supporting the ﬁndings of Brandt (1999) and Campbell and Viceira (1999).
Finally, we consider extensions of our baseline analysis to economic settings in discrete-
time and settings with stochastic interest rates, multiple stocks and multiple sources of
uncertainty.
We demonstrate our main results to be valid also under these alternative
environments. Moreover, we here provide fully-explicit closed-form solutions for optimal in-
vestment policies in several discrete-time settings with stochastic investment opportunities
that, to our knowledge, are new in the literature. In contrast, the extant literature charac-
terizes optimal policies in such settings by employing either numerical methods or various
approximations (e.g., Ait-Sahalia and Brandt, 2001; Bansal and Kiku, 2007; Brandt, Goyal,
Santa-Clara and Stroud, 2005; Brandt and Santa-Clara, 2006; Campbell and Viceira, 1999,
2002, among others).
There is a growing literature investigating the multi-period portfolio problem of a mean-
variance investor.
Bajeux-Besnainou and Portait (1998), Bielecki, Jin, Pliska and Zhou
(2005), Cvitanic, Lazrak and Wang (2008), Cvitanic and Zapatero (2004), Zhao and Ziemba
(2002) consider continuous-time complete market settings and employ martingale methods
to solve for the variance minimizing policy subject to the constraint that expected terminal
wealth equals some given level, sitting at an initial date. Cochrane (2008) in an incomplete-
market setting solves for the optimal investment policy that minimizes the “long-run” vari-
ance of portfolio returns subject to the constraint that the long-run mean of portfolio returns
equals a pre-speciﬁed target level. However, the ensuing solution in these works is a pre-
commitment investment policy chosen at an initial date since the investor may subsequently
ﬁnd it optimal to deviate from if the constraint is violated in the future. Duﬃe and Richard-
son (1991) study the futures hedging policy in a continuous-time incomplete market. They
73


=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
solve the hedging problem with a mean-variance objective sitting at an initial date, ob-
taining the pre-commitment solution, by observing that the optimal policy here also solves
the hedging problem with a quadratic objective for some speciﬁc parameters. Recognizing
the diﬃculty of applying dynamic programming, Li and Ng (2000), Leippold, Trojani and
Vanini (2004) in discrete-time, Zhou and Li (2000), Lim and Zhou (2002) in continuous-time,
use a similar approach to solve for mean-variance portfolios in complete market settings.
Speciﬁcally, these authors show that the investment policy that solves the mean-variance
problem sitting at an initial date also solves the one with a quadratic objective for some
speciﬁc parameters. The solution to the quadratic auxiliary optimization is then derived,
which gives the pre-commitment strategy for the mean-variance problem. Brandt (2009)
considers portfolio choice with mean-variance criterion over portfolio returns. The solution
is provided when the investor chooses portfolio weights for several periods ahead, implicitly
assuming pre-commitment.
Our work also contributes to the multi-period portfolio choice literature that provides
explicit closed-form solutions for optimal investment policies under various stochastic in-
vestment opportunities, all obtained in continuous-time settings. Kim and Omberg (1996)
explicitly solve for the optimal portfolio of an investor with constant relative risk aversion
(CRRA) preferences over terminal wealth when the market price of risk follows a mean-
reverting Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process in an incomplete market setting. Merton (1971) and
Wachter (2002) provide solutions to similar problems for constant absolute risk aversion
(CARA) and CRRA investors, respectively, with intermediate consumption under complete
markets. Maenhout (2006) extends the Kim-Omberg results by providing explicit solutions
for an investor who worries about model speciﬁcation, while Huang and Liu (2007) provide
a generalization with incomplete information. Liu (2001, 2007) obtains explicit solutions for
an investor with CRRA preferences over terminal wealth facing an incomplete market with
stochastic volatility. In similar models, Chacko and Viceira (2005) provide the explicit solu-
tion for an investor having recursive preferences over intertemporal consumption with unit
elasticity of intertemporal substitution, while Liu (2007) for a CRRA investor with intertem-
74


=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
poral consumption in a complete market. In related problems, nearly-explicit closed-form
solutions have additionally been obtained by Brennan and Xia (2002) and Sangvinatsos and
Wachter (2005). In general, however, obtaining fully-explicit closed-form solutions to dy-
namic portfolio choice problems with stochastic investment opportunities is a daunting task,
and one would need to resort to numerical methods, such as those proposed by Detemple,
Garcia and Rindisbacher (2003), Cvitanic, Goukasian and Zapatero (2003), and Brandt,
Goyal, Santa-Clara and Stroud (2005).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2.2, we present our
methodology for the determination of optimal dynamic mean-variance policies. We then
provide the time-consistent solution, discuss its properties, and compare it with the pre-
commitment policy.
In Section 2.3, we provide applications of our analysis to various
stochastic investment opportunities, while in Section 2.4, we discuss the extensions to
discrete-time, multiple-stock and stochastic interest rate settings.
Section 2.5 concludes
and the Appendix provides all proofs.
2.2.
Asset Allocation with Mean-Variance Criteria
2.2.1.
Economic Setup
We consider a continuous-time Markovian economy with a ﬁnite horizon [0, T]. Uncertainty
is represented by a ﬁltered probability space (Ω, F, {Ft}, P), on which are deﬁned two
correlated Brownian motions, w and wX, with correlation ρ. All stochastic processes are
assumed to be adapted to {Ft, t ∈[0, T]}, the augmented ﬁltration generated by w and
wX. In what follows, given our focus, we assume all processes and moments introduced are
well-deﬁned, without explicitly stating the regularity conditions.
Trading may take place continuously in two securities, a riskless bond and a risky stock.
The bond provides a constant interest rate r. The stock price, S, follows the dynamics
dSt
St
= µ(St, Xt, t)dt + σ(St, Xt, t)dwt,
(133)
where the stock mean return, µ, and volatility, σ, are deterministic functions of S and the
75


=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
state variable X, which satisﬁes
dXt = m(Xt, t)dt + ν(Xt, t)dwXt.
(134)
Under appropriate conditions, the stochastic diﬀerential equations (133)–(134) have a unique
solution (S, X), which is a joint Markov process.
We will denote µt, σt, mt and νt as
shorthand for the coeﬃcients in equations (133)–(134).
We note that under this setup,
the market is incomplete as trading in the stock and bond cannot perfectly hedge the
changes in the stochastic investment opportunity set.
However, in the special cases of
perfect correlation between the stock return and state variable, ρ = ±1, dynamic market
completeness obtains. For the case of zero correlation, there is no hedging demand for the
state variable since trading in the stock cannot hedge the ﬂuctuations in the state variable.
An investor in this economy is endowed at time zero with an initial wealth of W0. The
investor chooses an investment policy, θ, where θt denotes the dollar amount invested in the
stock at time t. The investor’s wealth process W then follows
dWt = [rWt + θt(µt −r)] dt + θtσtdwt.
(135)
We assume that the investor is guided by mean-variance objectives over horizon wealth WT .
In particular, the dynamic optimization problem of the investor is given by
max
θ
E[WT ] −γ
2var[WT ],
(136)
subject to the dynamic budget constraint (135).
In Section 2.2.2, we provide the time-
consistent solution to this problem via a recursive formulation that employs dynamic pro-
gramming, while in Section 2.2.4, we provide the pre-commitment solution via a static
formulation that employs martingale methods. We demonstrate that the two solutions are
generically diﬀerent.
In order to keep our problem analytically tractable, we follow the related literature
and make the simplifying assumptions of constant interest rate and lack of intermediate
consumption. It is unlikely that our model, with stochastic investment opportunities and
76


=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
potentially incomplete markets, could be solved analytically if these assumptions were re-
laxed, as in the related works of Kim and Omberg (1996), Liu (2001), Maenhout (2006).
However, with an appropriate choice of a numeraire, we provide an extension of our results
for the case with stochastic interest rates in Section 2.4.3. We further note that even though
the mean-variance criterion (136) is in many ways similar to the time-consistent quadratic
utility function, to our best knowledge the latter does not admit tractable optimal policies
in our economic setting. For example, Brandt and Santa-Clara (2006) investigate dynamic
portfolio selection with a quadratic criterion in an incomplete market setting and develop
an approach that leads to approximate solutions.
2.2.2.
Determination of Optimal Dynamic Investment Policy
In this Section, we ﬁrst present our solution method, based on dynamic programming, for
the determination of optimal dynamic mean-variance policies. Our method is analogous to
the original approach of Strotz (1956), recently re-emphasized by Caplin and Leahy (2006),
who advocates solving problems with time-inconsistent criteria recursively. The dynamic
programming approach here, however, is complicated by the presence of the variance term in
the mean-variance objective function: it cannot be represented as the expected utility over
terminal wealth, such as E[u(WT )], for which dynamic programming is readily applicable
due to the iterated-expectation property Et [Et+τ[u(WT )]] = Et[u(WT )]. The violation of
this property for mean-variance criteria makes the application of dynamic programming
problematic (see e.g., Zhou and Li, 2000). To our best knowledge, there are no works that
apply dynamic programming to derive explicit solutions to the multi-period mean-variance
portfolio choice. We tackle this problem by ﬁrst obtaining a tractable recursive formulation
for the mean-variance objective, expressed as its expected future value plus an adjustment
term, given by the time-t variance of expected terminal wealth. This explicit identiﬁcation
allows us to employ dynamic programming, derive the HJB equation and obtain an analytical
solution to the problem. The intuition for the adjustment term is based on the observation
that for a mean-variance optimizer sitting at time t + τ, the variability of terminal wealth
77


=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
may be lower than that of sitting at time t. This induces her to revise her time-t optimal
policy at subsequent dates, and hence the need for the adjustment in her objective function
sitting at any point in time.
Formally, the variability of terminal wealth, by the law of total variance (e.g., Weiss,
2005), is given by
vart[WT ] = Et [vart+τ(WT )] + vart [Et+τ(WT )] ,
τ > 0.
(137)
Clearly, the time-t variance exceeds the expected variance at time t + τ. As a result, the
investment policy θτ, for τ ≥t, chosen at time t, accounts not only for the expected time-
(t + τ) variance of the terminal wealth, but also for the variance of time-(t + τ) expected
terminal wealth. However, since the latter vanishes as time interval τ elapses, the investor
may deviate from the time-t optimal policy at time t + τ.19
We now account for these
incentives to deviate in the time-t objective function of the investor, who for each t ∈[0, T]
maximizes
Ut ≡Et[WT ] −γ
2vart[WT ],
(138)
subject to the dynamic budget constraint (135). Substituting (137) into (138) and using the
law of iterated expectations, we obtain the following recursive representation for the time-t
objective function of the mean-variance optimizer:
Ut = Et [Ut+τ] −γ
2 vart [Et+τ(WT )] .
(139)
This representation reveals that decision-making at time t involves maximizing the expected
future objective function, plus an adjustment that quantiﬁes the investor’s incentives to devi-
ate from the time-t optimal policy. This adjustment enables us to determine the investment
policy by backward induction, namely the time-consistent policy in that the investor opti-
mally chooses the policy taking into account that she will act optimally in the future, if she
19Johnsen and Donaldson (1985) provide necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the time-consistency of
intertemporal preferences in a discrete-time setting. These conditions essentially require that initial time-0
preferences can be expressed as an increasing function of preferences at future states/dates, and actions in
each state enter separably into the current utility function. The time-inconsistency of our mean-variance
criteria can alternatively be demonstrated by explicitly verifying that these conditions fail to hold even in a
simple two-period binomial setting.
78


=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
is not restricted from revising her policy at all times. We elaborate more on the issue of
time-consistency in Section 2.2.4.
Our next step towards the derivation of the HJB equation is to determine a recursive
relationship for the value function. Given the optimal time-consistent policy θ∗
s, s ∈[t, T],
derived by backward induction, the value function, J, is deﬁned as
J(Wt, St, Xt, t) ≡Et[W ∗
T ] −γ
2 vart[W ∗
T ],
where terminal wealth W ∗
T is computed under the optimal policy θ∗
s, s ≥t. Now let τ > 0
denote the decision-making interval such that the investor can reconsider her investment
policy chosen at time t only after the time interval τ elapses. Suppose further that at time
t, the investor anticipates to follow the optimal policy θ∗
s from time t + τ onwards. Then,
from the recursive representation of the objective function (139) and the deﬁnition of Jt+τ,
shorthand for the value function at t + τ, the investor’s time-t problem would be to ﬁnd an
investment policy θs, for s ∈[t, t + τ] that maximizes
Et[Jt+τ] −γ
2 vart [Et+τ(WT )] .
(140)
Sitting at time t, the investor accounts for the fact that starting from t + τ, she will follow
the policy that is optimal sitting at time t + τ. Note, however, that because of the time-
consistency adjustment term in (140), the investment policy θ∗
s, s ≥t + τ, under which
Jt+τ is computed, will not necessarily be optimal, when sitting at time t. Moreover, Jt is
not equal to the maximum of its expected future value, Jt+τ, as it would be in the case of
standard utility functions over terminal wealth that have the form Et[u(WT )].
Problem (140) presented above, and the deﬁnition of the value function after some
algebra (proof of Lemma 2.1) lead to the following recursive equation for J:
Jt =
max
θs,s∈[t,t+τ] Et[Jt+τ] −γ
2 vart[ft+τ −ft + Wt+τer(T−t−τ) −Wter(T−t)],
(141)
subject to the budget constraint (135) and the terminal condition JT = WT , where ft is
shorthand for f(Wt, St, Xt, t) deﬁned as
f(Wt, St, Xt, t) ≡Et[W ∗
T ] −Wter(T−t),
(142)
79


=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
representing expected total gains or losses from the optimal stock investment over the hori-
zon T −t, while W ∗
T is terminal wealth under the optimal policy θ∗
s, s ≥t.20 The dynamic
budget constraint (135) allows us to obtain the following representation for ft in terms of
the optimal stock investment policy θ∗
s:
f(Wt, St, Xt, t) = Et
Z T
t
θ∗
s(µs −r)er(T−s)ds

.
(143)
Going back to (141), it is clear that ft+τ is deﬁned using the optimal policy. This observation
enables us to formulate the following Lemma, which gives the HJB equation in diﬀerential
form and establishes some properties of θ∗
t , ft and Jt.
Lemma 2.1. The value function J(Wt, St, Xt, t) of a mean-variance optimizing investor
satisﬁes the following recursive equation:
0 = max
θt
Et[dJt] −γ
2 vart[dft + d(Wter(T−t))],
(144)
subject to JT = WT and the budget constraint (135), where ft is as in (143). Moreover,
J(Wt, St, Xt, t) is separable in wealth and admits the representation
J(Wt, St, Xt, t) = Wter(T−t) + ˜J(St, Xt, t),
(145)
while ft and the optimal investment policy θ∗
t do not depend on time-t wealth Wt and are
functions of St, Xt and t only.
We note that dft term in (144) is unaﬀected by the control θt since according to Lemma
2.1, ft does not depend on Wt and by deﬁnition is evaluated at the optimal policy. So,
θt aﬀects the adjustment term vart[dft + d(Wter(T−t))] via d(Wter(T−t)) only. Using the
separability property of J in (145) and applying Itˆo’s Lemma to ˜Jt, ft and Wter(T−t), from
the HJB equation (144) we obtain
0 = max
θt
n
D ˜Jtdt+θt(µt −r)er(T−t)dt−γ
2 vart
h
σtSt
∂ft
∂St
dwt +νt
∂ft
∂Xt
dwXt +θtσter(T−t)dwt
io
,
(146)
20In deriving (141) we use the fact that vart[ft+τ + Wt+τer(T −t−τ)] = vart[ft+τ −ft + Wt+τer(T −t−τ) −
Wter(T −t)].
80


=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
where D denotes the Dynkin operator.21 Computation of the variance term in (146) yields
the following PDE for the function ˜Jt:
0 = max
θt
n
D ˜Jt + θt(µt −r)er(T−t) −γ
2
h
σ2
t S2
t
 ∂ft
∂St
2
+ ν2
t
 ∂ft
∂Xt
2
+ 2ρνtσtSt
∂ft
∂St
∂ft
∂Xt
+θ2
t σ2
t e2r(T−t) + 2θtσt

σtSt
∂ft
∂St
+ ρνt
∂ft
∂St

er(T−t)io
,
(147)
subject to ˜JT = 0.
The HJB equation (147) is nonstandard in that in addition to the
conventional term, D ˜Jt+θt(µt−r)er(T−t), there is an adjustment component that is explicitly
characterized in terms of anticipated investment gains, ft, and the investment policy, θt. An
attractive feature of the HJB equation (147) is that the maximized expression is a quadratic
function of θt. We use this property to derive the following Proposition that provides a
recursive representation for the optimal investment policy θ∗
t .
Proposition 2.1. The optimal stock investment policy of a dynamic mean-variance opti-
mizer is given by
θ∗
t = µt −r
γσ2
t
e−r(T−t) −

St
∂ft
∂St
+ ρνt
σt
∂ft
∂Xt

e−r(T−t),
(148)
where the process ft represents the expected total gains or losses from the stock investment
and is given by
f(St, Xt, t) = Et
Z T
t
θ∗
s(µs −r)er(T−s)ds

.
(149)
The optimal investment policy has a simple, familiar structure, and is given by my-
opic and intertemporal hedging terms. The myopic demand, (µt −r)/γσ2
t , would be the
investment policy for an investor who optimized over the next instant not accounting for
her future investments, or the optimal policy if the investment opportunity set were con-
stant. The intertemporal hedging demands, then, arise due to the need to hedge against
the ﬂuctuations in the investment opportunities, as in the related portfolio choice literature,
21The Dynkin operator transforms an arbitrary twice continuously diﬀerentiable function F(St, Xt, t) as
follows:
DF(St, Xt, t) = ∂Ft
∂t + µtSt ∂Ft
∂St + mt ∂Ft
∂Xt + 1
2

σ2
t S2
t
∂2Ft
∂S2
t
+ ν2
t
∂2Ft
∂X2
t
+ 2ρνtσtSt
∂2Ft
∂Xt∂St

.
81


=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
following Merton (1971). What is diﬀerent in our case is that we explicitly identify the
hedging demands to be given by the sensitivities of anticipated portfolio gains (f) to the
stock price and state variable ﬂuctuations, whereas in other works these sensitivities are in
terms of the investor’s value function. The reason is that the mean-variance conditional
expected terminal wealth, and hence the value function, are linear in time-t wealth, and
as a result, no hedging demand arises due to marginal utility ﬂuctuations. Consequently,
since the conditional variance of terminal wealth equals the conditional variance of future
portfolio gains or losses, the anticipated portfolio gains or losses drive the hedging demands.
This, in turn, enables us to provide more direct intuition on the implications of the hedging
terms.
To see the role of the hedging demand, θH, we observe that
θHt ≡−

St
∂ft
∂St
+ ρνt
σt
∂ft
∂Xt

e−r(T−t) = −covt(dSt/St, dft)
σ2
t dt
e−r(T−t).
(150)
The hedging demand is positive when the instantaneous stock return is negatively correlated
with instantaneous portfolio gains. The reason for this is that when the stock return and
anticipated portfolio gains move in opposite directions, losses in one are oﬀset by the gains
in the other. This leads to a lower variability of wealth, making the stock more attractive,
and hence induces a positive hedging demand.
Even though the optimal stock investment expression is fairly intuitive, it is not char-
acterized in terms of the exogenous parameters of the model since it relies on knowing
the future optimal policy. To address this, we next recover an explicit representation for
the anticipated portfolio gains, f. Substituting (148) into (149), we obtain the following
representation for f under the original measure P:
f(St, Xt, t) = Et
"Z T
t
1
γ
µs −r
σs
2
ds
#
−Et
Z T
t

Ss
∂fs
∂Ss
+ ρνs
σs
∂fs
∂Xs

(µs −r)ds

. (151)
The ﬁrst component in (151) comes from the myopic demand, while the second comes from
the hedging demand. To facilitate tractability, we next look for a new probability measure
under which the representation of f does not have the hedging related component. Since
82


=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
ft is represented as a conditional expectation, by the Feynman-Kac theorem (Karatzas and
Shreve, 1991), we obtain the following PDE after some manipulation:
∂ft
∂t + rSt
∂ft
∂St
+

mt −ρνt
µt −r
σt
 ∂ft
∂Xt
+
1
2

σ2
t S2
t
∂2ft
∂S2
t
+ ν2
t
∂2ft
∂X2
t
+ 2ρνtσtSt
∂2ft
∂Xt∂St

+
1
γ
µt −r
σt
2
= 0,
(152)
with fT = 0. Again, by the Feynman-Kac theorem, (152) admits a unique solution with the
following representation:
f(St, Xt, t) = E∗
t
"Z T
t
1
γ
µs −r
σs
2
ds
#
,
(153)
where E∗
t [·] denotes the expectation under a new probability measure P ∗such that the stock
and state variable now follow dynamics with modiﬁed drifts22
dSt
St
= rdt + σtdw∗
t ,
dXt =

mt −ρνt
µt −r
σt

dt + νtdw∗
Xt,
(154)
and where w∗
t and w∗
Xt are Brownian motions under P ∗with correlation ρ.
Comparing
(153) with (151), we see that measure P ∗absorbs the hedging demand so that f represents
the anticipated gains from the myopic portfolio only. We henceforth label P ∗as the hedge-
neutral measure. Note that this measure is also a risk-neutral measure since it modiﬁes the
drift of S to equal to rS. However, in our setting the risk-neutral measure is not unique
due to market incompleteness;23 in the special case of a complete market, the hedge-neutral
and risk-neutral measures coincide. Proposition 2.2 summarizes the results above.
22Since the coeﬃcients assigned to partial derivatives ∂ft/∂St and ∂ft/∂Xt in the PDE (152) represent
the drifts of stochastic processes for S and X, it follows that measure P ∗modiﬁes the drifts so that S and
X satisfy (154).
23To see this, observe that dwXt can be decomposed as dwXt = ρdwt +
p
1 −ρ2d ˜wt, where wt and ˜wt are
uncorrelated Brownian motions under P. Hence, any measure under which dw∗
t = dwt + (µt −r)/σtdt and
d ˜w∗
t = d ˜wt + gtdt will be a risk-neutral measure irrespective of the process gt. We further note that in an
incomplete market, there is generally not a unique no-arbitrage price for a given payoﬀas it is impossible
to hedge perfectly. Towards this, a common approach for pricing and hedging with market incompleteness
is to choose a speciﬁc risk-neutral measure according to some criterion. Related to minimizing a quadratic
loss function, a large literature in mathematical ﬁnance has developed which employs: the “minimal martin-
gale measure” (Follmer and Sondermann, 1986; Schweizer, 1999) solving min
Q E[−ln(dQ/dP)], the “variance
optimal measure” (Schweizer, 1992) solving min
Q E[(dQ/dP)2], and the “minimal entropy measure” (Miya-
hara, 1996) solving min
Q E[dQ/dP ln(dQ/dP)], where dQ/dP denotes the Radon-Nikodym derivative of a
risk-neutral measure Q with respect to the original measure P. Interestingly, our measure P ∗, employed in
a somewhat diﬀerent context, turns out to coincide with the minimal martingale measure.
83


=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Proposition 2.2. The anticipated portfolio gains, f, can be expressed as
f(St, Xt, t) = E∗
t
"Z T
t
1
γ
µs −r
σs
2
ds
#
,
(155)
where E∗
t [·] denotes the expectation under the unique hedge-neutral measure P ∗on which
are deﬁned two Brownian motions w∗and w∗
X with correlation ρ, given by
dw∗
t = dwt + µt −r
σt
dt,
dw∗
Xt = dwXt + ρµt −r
σt
dt,
(156)
and measure P ∗is deﬁned by the Radon-Nikodym derivative
dP ∗
dP = e−1
2
R T
0 ( µs−r
σs
)2ds−
R T
0
µs−r
σs
dws.
(157)
Consequently, the optimal investment policy is given by
θ∗
t = µt −r
γσ2
t
e−r(T−t) −1
γ
 
St
∂E∗
t
hR T
t

µs−r
σs
2
ds
i
∂St
+ ρνt
σt
∂E∗
t
hR T
t

µs−r
σs
2
ds
i
∂Xt
!
e−r(T−t).
(158)
Proposition 2.2 provides a fully analytical characterization of the optimal investment
policy in terms of the model parameters which exists under certain regularity conditions.24
The characterization identiﬁes a unique measure P ∗that incorporates intertemporal hedg-
ing demands so that only the expected gains or losses from the myopic portfolio need to
be considered explicitly. This in turn allows us to explicitly compute the optimal dynamic
mean-variance portfolios in a straightforward manner, as will be demonstrated in Section
2.3. For economic environments in which explicit computations are not possible, the optimal
investment expression (158) can easily be computed numerically by standard Monte Carlo
24In particular, the Proposition proves the existence of the optimal policy θ∗
t satisfying the recursive
equations (148)–(149) assuming the exogenous parameters µt, σt, mt and νt are such that the expectations
in (158) are well-deﬁned and twice continuously diﬀerentiable (these conditions can explicitly be veriﬁed in
the speciﬁc applications of Section 2.3). Under this assumption ft is a classical solution of the PDE (152), and
hence, ft and θ∗
t solve equations (148)–(149). Moreover, from the Feynman-Kac theorem, the policy is unique
in the class of policies such that θt(µt −r) has polynomial growth in the stock price St and state variable
Xt. This polynomial growth can directly be checked in speciﬁc applications that provide explicit closed-form
expressions for θ∗
t . Verifying suﬃcient conditions for optimality are, in general, technically involved (e.g.,
Korn and Kraft, 2004) and are beyond the scope of this paper. Speciﬁcally, for the mean-variance framework,
veriﬁcation does not amount to comparing the value functions of the time-consistent and arbitrary policies,
as would be for the standard framework. The reason is that by construction, the value function under the
time-consistent mean-variance policy is lower than that under the pre-commitment policy.
84


=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
simulation methods, where the simulation would be performed under measure P ∗. Addi-
tionally, the partial derivatives can be written in terms of Malliavin derivatives, leading
to a more reﬁned representation, which can then be computed by Monte Carlo simulation
following the method of Detemple, Garcia and Rindisbacher (2003).
The optimal investment expression (158) also allows some simple comparative statics
to be carried out. First, the optimal dynamic investment displays a number of appealing,
conventional properties that are present in simple single-period or myopic models. Looking
at the risk aversion parameter γ, we see that the more risk averse the investor, the lower her
optimal investment in the risky stock (in absolute terms |θ∗|), with the investment tending
to zero for an extremely risk averse investor. Similar conclusions can be drawn on the eﬀects
of the stock volatility σ and bond interest rate r on investment behavior. As is commonly
assumed in the literature (and also in the applications of Sections 2.3.2–2.3.3), suppose that
the market price of risk, (µt −r)/σt, is driven by the state variable Xt only, and not by
σt or r. Under this scenario, higher the stock volatility or bond interest rate, lower the
stock investment (in absolute terms), since the stock now becomes less attractive, with the
investment monotonically tending to zero for higher levels of volatility or interest rate.
The correlation parameter ρ captures the extent of market incompleteness in the econ-
omy. When the market is incomplete, hedging against ﬂuctuations in the investment oppor-
tunities is complex since it may aﬀect the variability of terminal wealth. The implications
of this eﬀect are addressed in Section 2.2.3. The correlation parameter also aﬀects the joint
probability distribution of the stock and state variable under which the expressions in (158)
are evaluated. This indirect correlation eﬀect will be assessed in the applications studied
in Section 2.3. Finally, note that the quantitative eﬀect of the hedging demand due to the
state variable is directly driven by the correlation parameter. Clearly, this eﬀect is higher for
the case of complete markets, ρ = ±1, and disappears for zero correlation, ρ = 0. However,
with zero correlation, an intertemporal hedging term still arises (second term in (158)) due
to the market price of risk possibly being dependent on the stock price, consistent with such
a term arising when perfectly replicating a payoﬀby no-arbitrage in complete markets.
85


=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Turning to the time-horizon parameter T −t, in general the investor’s optimal risky stock
investment may increase or decrease as the investment horizon increases. Nevertheless, we
see that longer time-horizons decrease the myopic demand in (158) (in absolute terms). This
is because longer horizons imply higher variability of terminal wealth, and hence the investor
decreases the risky stock investment. The impact of the time-horizon on the hedging demand
is, however, ambiguous.
To illustrate this, suppose that both the myopic and hedging
demands are positive. When the time-horizon increases, while the investor’s myopic demand
decreases, her expected portfolio gains are higher, which may increase the hedging demand.
For short time-horizons, the former eﬀect dominates, and the hedging demand vanishes as
the horizon T −t is shortened. In the applications of Section 2.3, we demonstrate that the
optimal risky investment may either increase or decrease as the horizon increases, depending
on the speciﬁc economic setting.
Finally, the optimal investment expression highlights the importance of the market price
of risk process, (µt −r)/σt. The myopic demand is increasing in the price of risk, while the
eﬀect on the hedging demand is ambiguous. However, its impact on the hedging component
becomes less pronounced with shorter time-horizons since the integrals in (158) shrink as
the horizon T is approached. The eﬀect on the hedging demand also depends on whether
anticipated portfolio gains become more or less sensitive to the stock and state variable
as the market price of risk increases.
However, this eﬀect can be disentangled in some
applications for which the expectation under measure P ∗can be explicitly computed. For
constant market price of risk, the optimal mean-variance policy reduces to the myopic
demand expression, which is identical to the policy that would be obtained under CARA
preferences. Another common feature is the presence of the multiplicative discounting term
in (158), which is also present in the literature studying optimal CARA investments (Merton,
1971; Cox and Huang, 1989).25
Remark 1 (Recovering time-consistent objective functions). It is of interest to see
25Indeed, for CARA preferences with risk aversion parameter γ, it can be demonstrated that γer(T −t) =
−JW W /JW where J denotes the investor’s value function, and hence γer(T −t) can be interpreted as absolute
risk aversion.
86


=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
whether there are economically meaningful time-consistent objective functions leading to
our dynamically optimal investment policy (158). In our Markovian economy, it turns out
to be possible to recover a time-consistent, increasing, concave, state-dependent objective
function that implies the same optimal portfolio policy as our dynamically optimal one.
In particular, we consider the following dynamic optimization problem involving a state-
dependent objective function of CARA form:
max
θt
Et
h
−εTe−γWT
i
,
(159)
with ε following the process
dεt = −γ2
2
µt −r
γσt
2
+ (1 −ρ2)νt
 ∂ft
∂Xt
2
εtdt,
and ft given by (155), subject to the budget constraint (135). Applying dynamic program-
ming to this problem one can derive an HJB equation and verify that the value function is
given by Jt = −exp(−γ(Wter(T−t) + ft)), and that the optimal investment policy coincides
with (158). To understand the intuition behind the process εt we observe (from the opti-
mal wealth (161)) that dεt = −(γ2/2)εt vart[dW ∗
t er(T−t)], and hence, an investor with the
state-dependent utility (159) puts higher weight on those states of the economy in which the
optimal wealth process is less volatile along its path. Since εt > 0 we may construct a new
probability measure Q deﬁned by the Radon-Nikodym derivative εT/Et[εT] with respect to
the original measure P so that the optimization problem (159) is equivalent to
max
θt
EQ
t
h
−e−γWT
i
,
(160)
where EQ
t [·] denotes the expectation under the beliefs represented by measure Q. Further-
more, the CARA-type dynamic optimization problems, (159) or (160), leading to the same
solution as our dynamic mean-variance problem generalizes the well-known equivalence of
mean-variance and CARA optimization in a one-period setting with normally distributed
stock returns. We ﬁnally note that there are other time-consistent, state-dependent objec-
87


=== PDF PAGE 89 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
tive functions leading to the optimal policy (158).26
Remark 2 (Game-theoretic interpretation of optimal policies). Our methodology
until now has employed the traditional dynamic programming approach to portfolio choice.
However, the problem of ﬁnding the time-consistent mean-variance investment policy has
an intra-personal game-theoretic interpretation, as in the literature on consumer behavior
under time-inconsistent preferences (e.g., Peleg and Yaari, 1973; Harris and Laibson, 2001).
In particular, the investor, unable to precommit, takes the investment policy of her future
selves as given and reacts to them in an optimal way. Thus, her investment policy emerges
as the outcome of a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium in this game.
In particular, consider a game with a continuum of players (selves) [0, T]. Each player
t ∈[0, T] at time t is guided by the mean-variance criterion (138) over terminal wealth,
and chooses a time-t Markovian investment strategy θ(Wt, St, Xt, t) subject to the budget
constraint (135). Thus, the players impose an externality on each other by aﬀecting the
terminal wealth. Denote by J(Wt, St, Xt, t) player t’s value function when all players s ≥t
follow the equilibrium strategies θ∗(Wt, St, Xt, t). Then, a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium
of the game is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition: The set of strategies {θ∗
t , t ∈[0, T]} constitutes a pure-strategy Nash equi-
librium in the intra-personal game with the mean-variance objective if θ∗
t is an optimal
response of player t to the strategies θ∗
s of players s > t – that is, taking θ∗
s as given, θ∗
t
26In particular, using the results of Lemma 2.1 and Proposition 2.1, it is straightforward to see that the
dynamically optimal policy (26) can be obtained by solving a time-consistent instantaneous mean-variance
problem of the form
max
θt
Et[d(Wter(T −t)) + dft] −γ
2 vart[d(Wter(T −t)) + dft],
with ft given by (155), subject to budget constraint (135).
Interestingly, this objective becomes my-
opic in the restrictive special case of deterministic anticipated portfolio gains ft, max
θt
θt(µt −r)er(T −t) −
(γ/2)θ2
t σ2
t e2r(T −t). Moreover, solving the instantaneous problem generally can be demonstrated to be equiv-
alent to a CARA-type problem
max
θt
Et[−de−γ(Wter(T −t)+ft)],
since dWter(T −t) + dft is locally normally distributed. This is again analogous to the equivalence of the
mean-variance and CARA portfolio choice problems in a one-period setting under normality. Furthermore,
since Jt = −exp(−γ(Wter(T −t) + ft)) is a value function for a CARA-type criterion in (159), it turns out
that dynamic mean-variance portfolio choice is equivalent to the portfolio choice with monotonic CARA-type
preferences in (159).
88


=== PDF PAGE 90 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
solves the dynamic optimization problem (144).
It is straightforward to see that the set of strategies {θ∗
t , t ∈[0, T]} remains an equilib-
rium in any subgame of this game, thus comprising a subgame-perfect pure-strategy Nash
equilibrium. Moreover, the equilibrium strategy θ∗
t is characterized by the recursive equa-
tion for the optimal policy (148), which is now interpreted as the optimal response function
of player t to the actions θ∗
s of other players. The equilibrium strategy then coincides with
the closed-form expression for the optimal investment policy (158).
2.2.3.
Further Properties of Optimal Policy
In this Section, we discuss further properties of the mean-variance optimizer’s optimal be-
havior by providing explicit expressions for her terminal wealth, its moments, and her value
function. We particularly focus on the implications of market incompleteness. Towards
this, it is convenient to employ the decomposition wXt = ρwt +
p
1 −ρ2 ˜wt, where ˜wt is a
Brownian motion independent of wt, and so ˜wt represents the unhedgeable source of risk
in the economy. In the sequel, the eﬀect of market incompleteness on terminal wealth is
identiﬁed via the ˜w terms.
Proposition 2.3. The optimal terminal wealth, its mean, variance and the value function
of a dynamic mean-variance optimizer are given by
W ∗
T
=
Wter(T−t) + ft + 1
γ
Z T
t
µs −r
σs
dws +
p
1 −ρ2
Z T
t
νs
∂fs
∂Xs
d ˜ws,
(161)
vart[W ∗
T ]
=
1
γ2 Et
"Z T
t
µs −r
σs
2
ds
#
+ (1 −ρ2)Et
"Z T
t
ν2
s
 ∂fs
∂Xs
2#
ds,
(162)
Et[W ∗
T ]
=
Wter(T−t) + ft,
(163)
Jt
=
Wter(T−t) + ft −1
2γ Et
"Z T
t
µs −r
σs
2
ds
#
−γ
2(1 −ρ2)Et
"Z T
t
ν2
s
 ∂fs
∂Xs
2
ds
#
,
(164)
where ft = E∗
t [
R T
t (µs −r)2/γσ2
sds] and d ˜wt = (dwXt −ρdwt)/
p
1 −ρ2. Consequently, under
the assumption that the market price of risk (µt −r)/σt depends only on Xt,
(i) The variance of terminal wealth in incomplete markets is higher than that in complete
89


=== PDF PAGE 91 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
markets;
(ii) The mean of terminal wealth is increasing (decreasing) in the level of market incom-
pleteness, ρ2, when the hedging demand is positive (negative) for all s ∈[t, T];
(iii) The value function in incomplete markets is lower than that in complete markets when
the hedging demand is positive for all s ∈[t, T]. The eﬀect is ambiguous when the
hedging demand is negative.
Optimal terminal wealth is given by conditionally riskless terms (ﬁrst and second in
(161)), capturing anticipated bond and stock gains, and risky terms driven by the hedgeable
stock uncertainty (third term in (161)) and unhedgeable uncertainty (fourth term in (161)).
The eﬀect of market incompleteness on terminal wealth enters through the unhedgeable risk
and the joint probability distribution of stock return and state variable, both under the
original and new measures. The unhedgeable risk component vanishes in complete markets
with ρ2 = 1.27
The variance of optimal terminal wealth is determined by the variances of hedgeable (ﬁrst
term in (162)) and unhedgeable uncertainties (second term in (162)). When the market
price of risk depends only on the state variable, market incompleteness does not aﬀect
the hedgeable uncertainty variance. In that case, the terminal wealth variance is always
higher in incomplete markets than in complete markets by the presence of unhedgeable
risk (Proposition 2.3(i)). Naturally, this eﬀect is more pronounced for higher state variable
volatility or sensitivity of anticipated gains to the state variable. However, the anticipated
gains process, f, itself depends on the correlation ρ, which convolutes the exact dependence
of wealth variance on correlation, and hence market completeness.28 This indirect eﬀect can
be disentangled in the applications, where the expectation under measure P ∗can explicitly
be computed.
27As for CARA and quadratic preferences, the optimal mean-variance terminal wealth in (161) may become
negative. In future work, it would be of interest to incorporate a non-negativity constraint on terminal wealth
into our analysis which would ensure that the investor remains solvent.
28This is due to the fact that the drift of the state variable is aﬀected by the correlation ρ under measure
P ∗, as revealed by equation (154).
90


=== PDF PAGE 92 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
The eﬀect of market incompleteness on the mean of terminal wealth enters via the
anticipated gains, f. Proposition 2.3(ii) states that the direction of this eﬀect is determined
by the sign of the hedging demand. In particular, the expected terminal wealth is lower for
higher levels of market incompleteness (i.e., lower ρ2) when the hedging demand is positive
till the horizon and the market price of risk depends only on the state variable. The reason is
that lower correlation ρ decreases the hedging demand, which vanishes for zero correlation,
as discussed in Section 2.2.2. So, the investor’s positive hedging demand will be lower for
higher levels of market incompleteness, leading to lower expected terminal wealth. Clearly,
the converse is true when the hedging demand is negative.
Turning to the value function, we ﬁnd that when the hedging demand is positive until
the horizon, the mean-variance optimizer is worse oﬀin incomplete markets due to higher
variance and lower expectation of terminal wealth. However, the welfare eﬀect is ambiguous
in the case of negative hedging demand, for which the expected wealth is higher in incomplete
markets, oﬀsetting the eﬀect of higher variance. As will be shown in Section 2.3, the sign
of the hedging demand can readily be identiﬁed in particular applications, simplifying the
analysis in incomplete markets.
2.2.4.
Optimal Pre-commitment Policy
In Section 2.2.2, we have already demonstrated that the mean-variance objective in a dy-
namic setting results in time-inconsistency of the investment policy, in that an investor has
an incentive to deviate from an initial policy at a later date. We have so far focused on the
time-consistent investment policy in which the investor chooses an investment in each period
that maximizes her objective at that period, taking into account the re-adjustments that she
will make in the future. We now analyze the alternative way of dealing with this issue and
look at the pre-commitment investment policy in which the investor initially chooses a pol-
icy to maximize her objective function at time 0, and thereafter does not deviate from that
policy. Of course, with standard utility functions and absent market imperfections, the so-
lutions to the time-consistent and pre-commitment formulations are well-known to coincide
91


=== PDF PAGE 93 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
(Cox and Huang, 1989; Karatzas, Lehoczky and Shreve, 1987). The pre-commitment solu-
tion, in our view, serves as a useful benchmark against which to compare our time-consistent
solution, especially because the explicit analytical solutions to the dynamic mean-variance
problem so far have been obtained only in the pre-commitment case. Moreover, if there
were a credible mechanism for the investor to commit to her initial policy, she would be
better oﬀto follow her initial policy than the time-consistent policy, since the dynamic time-
consistency requirement restricts her to consider only policies that she would not be willing
to deviate from. Thus, if the investor were able to pre-commit, her time-0 value function
would have been higher than the one under the time-consistent policy.
The pre-commitment mean-variance problem and its variations have been analyzed in the
literature, amongst others, by Bajeux-Besnainou and Portrait (1998), Bielecki, Jin, Pliska
and Zhou (2005), Cvitanic and Zapatero (2004), Zhao and Li (2000), Zhao and Ziemba
(2002). These works have primarily employed martingale methods in a complete market
setting. For completeness, we here provide the pre-commitment solution for our setting,
and follow the literature by specializing to a complete-market setting, ρ = ±1. Portfolio
choice problems that employ martingale methods in incomplete markets are well-known to
be a daunting task. However, we can illustrate our main points in the simple complete
market setting.
Dynamic market completeness allows the construction of a unique state price density
process, ξ, consistent with no-arbitrage, and given by
ξt = ξ0e−rt−1
2
R t
0

µs−r
σs
2
ds−
R t
0
µs−r
σs
dws.
(165)
The quantity ξT (ω) can be interpreted as the Arrow-Debreu price per unit probability P of
one unit of wealth in state ω ∈Ωat time T, and without loss of generality, we set ξ0 = 1. The
dynamic investment problem of an investor can be restated as a static variational problem
using the martingale representation approach (Cox and Huang, 1989; Karatzas, Lehoczky
and Shreve, 1987). Accordingly, a mean-variance optimizer under pre-commitment solves
92


=== PDF PAGE 94 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
the following problem at time 0:
max
WT E0[WT ] −γ
2 var0[WT ],
(166)
subject to E0[ξT WT ] ≤W 0.
(167)
Proposition 2.4 presents the optimal solution to this problem in terms of the state price
density.
Proposition 2.4. The optimal terminal wealth of a mean-variance optimizer under pre-
commitment is given by
ˆWT = W 0erT + 1
γ E0[ξ2
T ]e2rT −1
γ ξT erT .
(168)
Furthermore, under the assumption of a constant market price of risk (µt−r)/σt ≡(µ−r)/σ,
the pre-committed investor’s optimal terminal wealth and investment policy are given by
ˆWT
=
W 0erT + 1
γ e( µ−r
σ )2T −1
γ ξT erT ,
(169)
ˆθt
=
µ −r
γσ2 e−r(T−t)ξte( µ−r
σ )2(T−t)+rt.
(170)
To facilitate comparisons with the pre-commitment solution above, we also provide the
time-consistent solution (Propositions 2.2–2.3). In the special case of a complete market,
the time-consistent optimal terminal wealth, expressed in terms of the state price density,
is given by
W ∗
T = W0erT + 1
γ E0
h
ξT erT
Z T
0
µs −r
σs
2
ds
i
−1
γ
h
ln ξT + rT + 1
2
Z T
0
µs −r
σs
2
ds
i
. (171)
Under the additional assumption of constant market price of risk, the time-consistent opti-
mal terminal wealth and investment policy are
W ∗
T
=
W0erT + 1
γ
µ −r
σ
2
T −1
γ
h
ln ξT + rT + 1
2
µ −r
σ
2
T
i
,
(172)
θ∗
t
=
µ −r
γσ2 e−r(T−t).
(173)
93


=== PDF PAGE 95 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Clearly, the pre-commitment solution ((168)–(170)) and the time-consistent solution
((171)–(173)) are generically diﬀerent. The two solutions coincide only in the knife-edge
case of a zero market price of risk, in which case both the pre-commitment and time-
consistent policies entail investing nothing in the stock and putting all wealth in the bond.
We observe that for short investment horizons T, the pre-commitment solution approximates
the time-consistent one up to second-order terms. However, for plausible horizons, the two
solutions can diﬀer considerably. In particular, for constant market price of risk case, the pre-
commitment expected terminal wealth is higher than the time-consistent one for suﬃciently
long investment horizons.29 This is because the inability to pre-commit destroys investors
welfare. While for short time-horizons the eﬀect of time-inconsistency can be negligible, it is
ampliﬁed at longer time-horizons. Moreover, since the state price density is positive, it can
easily be observed from (169) that the terminal wealth under the pre-commitment policy is
bounded from above. In contrast, the time-consistent policy retains the intuitive property
that the terminal wealth can become arbitrarily large for suﬃciently small state prices when
the cost of wealth is low.30
The pre-commitment policy is stochastic, driven by the state-price density, even under
the assumed constant investment opportunity set, while the time-consistent investment is
deterministic.
Being stochastic, the investment policy under pre-commitment induces a
hedging demand component, which is ampliﬁed at longer horizons. As a result, with longer
horizons, the pre-committed investor tends to invest more in the risky stock than the time-
consistent investor does. Finally, in bad states (high ξ) the pre-committed mean-variance
optimizer increases her risky investment, and in good states decreases investments. This is
29To see this, observe that the expected wealth under pre-commitment (169) grows exponentially with the
horizon, while the expected wealth under time-consistency (172) grows linearly. Even though the variance
is also higher in the pre-commitment case, it can be veriﬁed that the time-0 probability Prob0( ˆ
WT > W ∗
T )
approaches unity with long horizons. Indeed, from (165), (169) and (172) ˆ
WT −W ∗
T can be written as a
function of wT /
√
T. Moreover, it can be shown that this function is positive whenever −0.5((µ−r)/σ)
√
T ≤
wT /
√
T ≤0.5((µ −r)/σ)
√
T and T is suﬃciently large.
Therefore, since wT /
√
T is standard normal,
ˆ
WT ≥W ∗
T with probability approaching unity as T →∞.
30This property holds for any utility function satisfying the condition lim WT →∞u′(WT ) = 0 since the
marginal utility u′(WT ) is proportional to the state price density ξT at the optimum. In particular, one
can easily demonstrate that for CARA utility with absolute risk aversion parameter γ the optimal terminal
wealth is unbounded and is given by WT = −(1/γ) ln ξT −(1/γ) ln(λ/γ), where λ is a constant, similarly to
(172).
94


=== PDF PAGE 96 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
because bad, costly states reduce her expected terminal wealth. To oﬀset this, the investor
takes on more risk by increasing her risky investment.
2.3.
Applications
This Section provides several applications that illustrate the simplicity and the usefulness of
the methodology developed in Section 2.2. In Sections 2.3.1–2.3.3, we consider the portfolio
choice problem of a mean-variance optimizer for diﬀerent stochastic investment opportunity
sets. We obtain explicit solutions to these problems and provide further insights, disentan-
gling some eﬀects that cannot be analyzed in the general framework. We also assess the
economic signiﬁcance of the intertemporal hedging demands of a mean-variance optimizer
by quantitatively comparing them with the total demand in the richer economic settings of
Sections 2.3.2–2.3.3.
2.3.1.
Constant Elasticity of Variance
In this Section, we specialize our setting to a complete market and the constant elasticity
of variance (CEV) model for the stock price:
dSt
St
= µdt + ¯σSα/2
t
dwt,
(174)
where α is the elasticity of instantaneous stock return variance, σ2
t = ¯σ2Sα
t , with respect
to the stock price. This process is a generalization of geometric Brownian motion, which
corresponds to α = 0, and has been successfully employed in the option pricing literature
(e.g, Cox and Ross, 1976; Schroder, 1989; Cox, 1996) to model the empirically observed
pattern of stock prices with heavy tails. Moreover, the CEV process with α < 0 generates
the ﬁnding that the volatility increases when the stock price falls (Black, 1976; Beckers,
1980). When α < 0, the distribution of stock prices has the left tail heavier than the right
one, while the converse is true for α > 0. The CEV model also helps explain volatility smiles
(Cox, 1996).
The mean-variance investor’s optimal policy under the CEV setting can be computed
explicitly by a straightforward application of Proposition 2.2. It amounts to computing the
95


=== PDF PAGE 97 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
anticipated gains process under measure P ∗, which coincides with the familiar risk-neutral
one due to market completeness. We then derive the anticipated gains by computing the
expectation of the squared market price of risk, which after some manipulation, reduces
to solving an ordinary linear diﬀerential equation for which we obtain the unique explicit
solution. We emphasize that this computation does not resort to solving an HJB PDE,
as it would be the case under other popular objective functions, such as CRRA or CARA
preferences. The following Corollary to Proposition 2.2 presents the optimal investment
policy, as well as some of its properties.
Corollary 2.1. The optimal stock investment policy for the CEV model (174) is given by:
θ∗
t = µ −r
γ¯σ2Sα
t
e−r(T−t) −1
γ
 
µ −r
¯σSα/2
t
!2 e−αr(T−t) −1
r
e−r(T−t).
(175)
Consequently,
(i) The hedging demand is positive (negative) for α > 0 (α < 0), and vanishes for α = 0;
(ii) The optimal investment policy θ∗
t is a quadratic function of the market price of risk,
(µ −r)/¯σSα/2
t
, and may become negative for large values of market price of risk when
α < 0;
(iii) The optimal investment policy is a decreasing function of the time-horizon, T −t, for
α ≤−1 and µ −r > 0, and is non-monotonic otherwise.
Corollary 2.1(i) reveals that the sign of the hedging demand (the second term in (175))
depends on the sign of the elasticity α. Positive elasticity implies that the market price
of risk decreases in the stock price. This induces a negative correlation between the stock
returns and anticipated portfolio gains (given by (155)) since the latter are positively related
to the market price of risk. As discussed in Section 2.2.2, this gives rise to a positive hedging
demand. Analogously, the hedging demand is negative for negative elasticity.
Property (ii) of Corollary 2.1 sheds light on the impact of the market price of risk on
the optimal investment policy. The optimal investment policy is a quadratic function of the
96


=== PDF PAGE 98 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
market price of risk for a given stock volatility. Moreover, with negative hedging demand
the investor may short the stock despite a high market price of risk or risk premium. In such
a case, an increase in the market price of risk leads to a proportionally larger increase in
anticipated gains. This then implies a larger covariance between stock returns and portfolio
gains, making the hedging demand larger than the myopic demand in absolute terms, and
hence the negative stock investment.
Turning to the horizon eﬀect, property (iii) reveals that the optimal investment can
be either decreasing or non-monotonic as the time-horizon increases, due to two eﬀects
working in opposite directions. On one hand, the investment is perceived riskier at longer
horizons which decreases the demand for stock. On the other hand, the anticipated gains
may become higher with longer horizon, inducing larger hedging demands in absolute terms.
As a result, hedging demands can be either increasing or decreasing functions of the horizon,
depending on their sign. Thus, depending on which eﬀect is stronger for a given horizon, the
optimal risky investment may increase or decrease as the horizon increases, which results in
a non-monotonic pattern.
2.3.2.
Stochastic Volatility
We now consider an incomplete market setting in which the stock price follows the stochastic-
volatility model of Liu (2001):
dSt
St
= (r + δX(1+β)/2β
t
)dt + X1/2β
t
dwt,
(176)
where the state variable, X, follows a mean-reverting square-root process
dXt = λ( ¯X −Xt)dt + ¯ν
p
XtdwXt,
(177)
and where β̸ = 0 is the elasticity of the market price of risk, δ√Xt, with respect to instan-
taneous stock return volatility, σt = X1/2β
t
, and λ > 0 (to exclude explosive processes).
In this setting, Liu derives an explicit solution to the portfolio choice problem for an
investor with CRRA preferences over terminal wealth. The case of β = −1 corresponds
97


=== PDF PAGE 99 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
to the stochastic-volatility model employed by Chacko and Viceira (2005), who study the
intertemporal consumption and portfolio choice problem for an investor with recursive pref-
erences over intermediate consumption. They obtain an exact solution to the problem for
investors with unit elasticity of intertemporal substitution of consumption.
The case of
β = 1 reduces to the stochastic-volatility model of Heston (1993), popular in option pricing.
Our mean-variance investor’s dynamic optimal policy is again a straightforward, simple
application of Proposition 2.2. Since the squared market price of risk equals δ2Xt, explicitly
ﬁnding the solution amounts to computing the conditional expectation of the state variable
under measure P ∗, which is easily seen (second equation in (154)) to also follow a mean-
reverting, square-root process as in (177). The conditional expectation of such a process is
well-known (e.g., Cox, Ingersoll and Ross, 1985). In contrast, the solution method of Liu
is based on the derivation of the HJB equation for the investor’s value function. However,
in the case of CRRA preferences this approach is cumbersome for two reasons. First, it
involves guessing the value function and reducing the HJB to a system of ODE, one of which
is a Riccatti equation. Second, this system of equations itself is notorious for complexity.
Corollary 2.2 reports our solution and some of its properties.
Corollary 2.2. The optimal stock investment policy for the stochastic-volatility model (176)–
(177) is given by:
θ∗
t = δ
γ X(β−1)/2β
t
e−r(T−t) −ρ¯νδ
1 −e−(λ+ρ¯νδ)(T−t)
λ + ρ¯νδ
 δ
γ X(β−1)/2β
t
e−r(T−t).
(178)
Consequently,
(i) The hedging demand is positive (negative) for ρ < 0 (ρ > 0) and vanishes for ρ = 0;
(ii) The optimal investment policy θ∗
t is positive (negative) for positive (negative) stock
risk premium;
(iii) The optimal investment policy is increasing (decreasing) in the market price of risk,
δ√Xt, for β < 0 or β > 1 (0 < β < 1) when the stock risk premium is positive, and
the converse is true when the stock risk premium is negative;
98


=== PDF PAGE 100 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
(iv) The optimal investment policy is increasing in the time-horizon T −t for λ+r+ρ¯νδ < 0,
is decreasing for ρ¯νδ > 0, and is non-monotonic otherwise;
(v) The expected terminal wealth, Et[W ∗
T ], is decreasing in the correlation ρ. The variance
of terminal wealth, vart[W ∗
T ], attains its minimum when the market is complete, ρ2 =
1, and its maximum for some ρ∗< 0. The value function, Jt, is decreasing in ρ on
the interval [−1, ρ∗] and ambiguous otherwise.
Corollary 2.2(i) shows that the sign of the hedging demand (second term in (178)) is
determined by the sign of the correlation between the stock and state variable.
When
this correlation is negative, the instantaneous stock returns are negatively correlated with
anticipated portfolio gains since the latter are positively related to the squared market price
of risk, δ2Xt. As discussed in Section 2.2.2, such a negative correlation with anticipated
gains induces a positive hedging demand. Analogously, a positive correlation ρ gives rise to
a negative hedging demand.
Property (ii) of Corollary 2.2 reveals that the mean-variance optimizer always holds a
long position in a risky stock with positive risk premium, as in static or myopic portfolio
choice problems.31 In contrast, Liu (2001) ﬁnds that a CRRA investor with low risk aversion
may short the risky stock even for a high positive risk premium.
Moreover, the mean-
variance investment policy is increasing in the market price of risk for negative (β < 0) or
relatively high (β > 1) elasticities of market price of risk with respect to stock volatility
when the stock risk premium is positive (property (iii)). With a negative elasticity, the
market price of risk is high when the stock volatility is low that makes the stock attractive.
For high elasticities, high market price of risk is associated with a high volatility. However,
since the elasticity is high, an increase in the market price of risk oﬀsets an increase in
the stock volatility making the stock attractive. Conversely, for intermediate elasticities
(0 < β < 1), the optimal investment decreases in the market price of risk.
Property (iv) also shows that the optimal investment either increases or decreases as
31The optimal investment, however, may become negative for negative speed of mean-reversion λ, which
corresponds to an explosive process for the state variable.
99


=== PDF PAGE 101 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
the time-horizon increases, similarly to the setting in Section 2.3.1.
This horizon eﬀect
depends on the covariance between the stock returns and state variable per unit of stock
volatility, ρ¯ν, ampliﬁed by the risk premium scale parameter, δ. With positive correlation
and high state variable volatility, hedging demand is small and vanishes with long horizons.
Otherwise, increasing the stock investment would lead to higher anticipated gains and higher
variability of terminal wealth ampliﬁed by longer time-horizon. Conversely for suﬃciently
negative correlation.
Corollary 2.2(v) also sheds further light on the eﬀect of market incompleteness on wealth
and welfare. First, the expected terminal wealth is decreasing in the correlation between the
stock and state variable. For negative correlation, it decreases since the hedging demand is
positive, and becomes smaller as the correlation approaches zero. For positive correlation,
expected terminal wealth declines since the hedging demand is negative, and becomes larger
in absolute terms as the correlation approaches unity. In congruence with Proposition 2.3,
the variance of terminal wealth is lowest in the complete market case (ρ2 = 1), in which
perfect hedging is possible, and attains a maximum at some intermediate correlation level
ρ∗< 0. Thus, for relatively low correlation (ρ < ρ∗) the expected wealth is decreasing in
correlation while the variance is increasing, which leads the welfare to decrease in correlation.
The welfare eﬀect is ambiguous for relatively high correlation (ρ > ρ∗) since lower expected
wealth is counterbalanced by decreased variance. However, for plausible parameter values
(Table 2.1, Panel A: ρ = 0.5241, ¯ν = 0.6503, δ = 0.0811, λ = 0.3374), it can be shown that
the loss in expected wealth dominates, and hence the welfare decreases in correlation.
Finally, we investigate the economic signiﬁcance of the mean-variance intertemporal
hedging demands induced by the stochastic volatility setting. To this end, we compute the
ratio of the hedging demand to total optimal demand, θHt/θ∗
t , for a range of plausible pa-
rameter values. Conveniently, this ratio is deterministic and depends only on the correlation
ρ, the state variable speed of mean-reversion λ and volatility parameter ¯ν for a given time-
horizon. Table 2.1 presents the percentage hedging demand for varying levels of correlation,
100


=== PDF PAGE 102 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Table 2.1
Percentage Hedging Demand over Total Demand
for the Stochastic-Volatility Model with elasticity β = −1
The table reports the percentage hedging demand over total demand for diﬀerent levels of
correlation ρ, speed of mean-reversion λ and time-horizon T −t. The other pertinent parameters
are ﬁxed at their estimated values. The relevant model parameter values are taken from Chacko
and Viceira (2005, Table 1) who estimate the stochastic-volatility model with elasticity β = −1
using U.S. stock market data based on monthly returns from 1928 to 2000 and annual returns
from 1871 to 2000.
Panel A reports our results for (annualized) parameter values ρ = 0.5241,
¯ν = 0.6503, δ = 0.0811 and λ = 0.3374 based on estimates from the monthly data of 1926–
2000.
Panel B reports the results for parameter values ρ = 0.3688, ¯ν = 1.1703, δ = 0.0848
and λ = 0.0438 based on annual data of 1871–2000.
Both tables also report results for vary-
ing levels of ρ and λ, with bolded ratios corresponding to the estimated parameter values of ρ and λ.
Panel A: Monthly Data Parameter Estimates
Panel B: Annual Data Parameter Estimates
Horizon
Horizon
ρ
6-month
1-year
5-year
10-year
20-year
6-month
1-year
5-year
10-year
20-year
-1.00
2.4
4.39
12.3
14.9
15.6
4.8
9.3
36.4
57.0
78.4
-0.50
1.2
2.2
6.23
7.5
7.8
2.4
4.7
20.1
33.8
51.3
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.37
-1.0
-1.7
-4.8
-5.6
-5.8
-1.8
-3.6
-17.7
-33.6
-57.3
0.50
-1.2
-2.3
-6.5
-7.6
-7.8
-2.5
-5.0
-24.7
-47.6
-81.5
0.52
-1.3
-2.4
-6.8
-8.0
-8.2
-2.6
-5.2
-26.0
-50.3
-86.2
1.00
-2.5
-4.6
-13.1
-15.3
-15.6
-5.0
-10.2
-54.9
-111.8
-189.1
λ
6-month
1-year
5-year
10-year
20-year
6-month
1-year
5-year
10-year
20-year
0.00
-1.4
-2.8
-14.8
-31.8
-73.8
-1.9
-3.7
-20.1
-44.2
-107.9
0.04
-1.4
-2.7
-13.2
-24.6
-41.7
-1.8
-3.6
-17.7
-33.6
-57.3
0.30
-1.3
-2.4
-7.3
-8.8
-9.2
-1.7
-3.2
-9.7
-11.7
-12.2
0.34
-1.3
-2.4
-6.8
-8.0
-8.2
-1.7
-3.2
-9.0
-10.6
-10.8
0.60
-1.2
-2.1
-4.4
-4.6
-4.6
-1.6
-2.8
-5.8
-6.1
-6.1
0.90
-1.1
-1.8
-3.0
-3.1
-3.1
-1.5
-2.4
-4.0
-4.1
-4.1
speed of mean-reversion and the investor’s horizon.32 The relevant parameter values are
taken from Chacko and Viceira (2005), who estimate the stochastic-volatility model with
elasticity β = −1 using U.S. stock market data based on monthly returns from 1926 to 2000
and annual returns from 1871 to 2000.
Inspection of the results in Panel A of Table 2.1, based on monthly data parameter
estimates, reveals a relatively small ratio of the hedging demand over total demand, ranging
from −1.3% to −8.2% for the parameter estimates ρ = 0.52 and λ = 0.34 (in bold). This
32We do not consider varying the levels of ¯ν and δ since they always appear multiplicatively with the
correlation ρ in the hedging and total demand expressions. So, separately varying the levels of ¯ν and δ would
lead to a range of percentage hedging demand similar to that generated by diﬀerent levels of ρ.
101


=== PDF PAGE 103 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
small magnitude of the hedging demand is due to the relatively low correlation and high
speed of mean-reversion estimates. In contrast, Panel B, based on annual data parameter
estimates, reveals a considerably larger percentage hedging demand, ranging from −1.8%
to −57.3% for the parameter estimates ρ = 0.37 and λ = 0.04. Our results are in line
with the ﬁndings of Chacko and Viceira, although in absolute terms they are large. Chacko
and Viceira ﬁnd the percentage hedging demand to range from −1.5% to −3.6% for the
monthly data and from −5.2% to −18.4% for the yearly data for an inﬁnitely-lived recursive-
utility investor with relative risk aversion and elasticity of intertemporal substitution ranging
[1.5, 40] and [1/0.8, 1/40], respectively.33 Thus, the hedging demand in our setting is larger
in absolute terms than in Chacko and Viceira.
2.3.3.
Time-Varying Gaussian Mean Returns
In this Section, we consider the mean-variance optimizer’s problem in an incomplete market
in which the stock price dynamics are specialized to follow:
dSt
St
= (r + σXt)dt + σdwt,
(179)
where the market price of risk, Xt, follows a mean-reverting Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process
dXt = λ( ¯X −Xt)dt + νdwXt,
(180)
with λ > 0.
Kim and Omberg (1996) explicitly solves the portfolio choice problem of
an investor with CRRA preferences over terminal wealth in this incomplete market setting.
Merton (1971) studies the consumption and portfolio choice problem of an agent with CARA
preferences in this Gaussian mean-reverting setting for the special complete-market case of
positive perfect correlation, ρ = +1. Wachter (2002) provides an explicit solution to the
consumption and portfolio choice problem of an investor with CRRA preferences under this
setting with negative perfect correlation, ρ = −1. Campbell and Viceira (1999) study the
33Chacko and Viceira compute the ratio of hedging demand to myopic demand, which we then convert
into the ratio of hedging demand to total demand. Moreover, they also consider the case of the relative risk
aversion being less than unity, which is less empirically plausible for the average investor. In that case, they
ﬁnd that the ratio of hedging demand to myopic demand is positive.
102


=== PDF PAGE 104 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
inﬁnite-horizon discrete-time consumption and portfolio choice of an investor with recursive
utility and under discrete-time versions of the dynamics (179)–(180), where the state variable
is taken to be the dividend-price ratio.
For the mean-variance optimizer, ﬁnding the optimal investment policy again reduces
to computing the expectation of the squared market price of risk, X2
t , under measure P ∗.
It follows from (154) that under this measure, the market price of risk follows a simple
mean-reverting process as in (180) for which the ﬁrst and second moments can easily be
derived (e.g., Vasicek, 1977). This approach avoids solving the HJB equation which is a
tedious task in the case of CRRA preferences and incomplete markets since it amounts to
solving a system of nonlinear ordinary diﬀerential equations (e.g., Kim and Omberg, 1996).
The following Corollary to Proposition 2.2 reports our mean-variance solution and some of
its unambiguous properties.
Corollary 2.3. The optimal stock investment policy for the time-varying Gaussian mean
returns model (179)–(180) is given by:
θ∗
t = Xt
γσe−r(T−t) −ρν
γσ

λ
1 −e−(λ+ρν)(T−t)
λ + ρν
2 ¯X + 1 −e−2(λ+ρν)(T−t)
λ + ρν
Xt

e−r(T−t). (181)
Consequently,
(i) The mean hedging demand is positive (negative) for ρ < 0 (ρ > 0) and vanishes for
ρ = 0 when ¯X > 0, and the converse is true when ¯X < 0;
(ii) The optimal stock investment, θ∗
t , is increasing in the market price of risk, Xt.
The hedging demand (second term in (181)) in general may become positive or negative
for any combination of model parameters depending on the sign and magnitude of the
market price of risk Xt, which is Gaussian and can possibly take on negative values. The
mean hedging demand, the unconditional expectation of the hedging demand, however,
is positive for negative correlation between the stock and state variable, and negative for
positive correlation. The intuition for this is as in the stochastic-volatility model of the
previous Section (Corollary 2.2(i)).
103


=== PDF PAGE 105 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Table 2.2
Percentage Mean Hedging Demand over Mean Total Demand
for the Mean-Reverting Gaussian Returns Model
The table reports the percentage mean hedging demand over mean total demand for diﬀerent
levels of correlation ρ, speed of mean-reversion λ and the investor’s time-horizon T −t.
The
other pertinent parameters are ﬁxed at their estimated values.
The relevant parameter values
are taken from the estimates provided in Wachter (2002, Table 1).
These parameter esti-
mates are based on their discrete-time analogues in Barberis (2000) and Campbell and Viceira
(1999), and are: ρ = −0.93, ν = 0.065 and λ = 0.27.
The table also reports results for vary-
ing levels of ρ and λ, with bolded ratios corresponding to the estimated parameter values of ρ and λ.
Horizon
ρ
6-month
1-year
5-year
10-year
20-year
-1.00
19.1
32.5
71.0
81.6
87.4
-0.93
17.9
30.7
68.2
78.7
84.4
-0.50
10.0
17.9
45.5
54.2
58.1
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.50
-11.2
-22.2
-96.5
-135.1
-143.5
1.00
-23.8
-50.1
-427.7
-920.6
-1020.9
λ
6-month
1-year
5-year
10-year
20-year
0.00
19.0
34.4
87.9
98.5
100.0
0.27
17.9
30.7
68.2
78.7
84.4
0.30
17.7
30.3
66.1
75.8
80.6
0.60
16.6
26.9
48.7
51.6
52.0
0.90
15.5
23.6
37.3
38.0
38.0
Corollary 2.3(ii) reveals the optimal investment policy to be increasing in the market
price of risk. Thus, our dynamic mean-variance optimizer under the mean-reverting Gaus-
sian setting retains this familiar property of the myopic or static portfolio choices despite
a potentially large hedging demand, as demonstrated below. However, the welfare implica-
tions of the market incompleteness for this setting are complicated due to the fact that the
hedging demand may change signs over time depending on the behavior of the market price
of risk, but can explicitly be analyzed for a given set of model parameters.
We here assess the signiﬁcance of the intertemporal hedging demands by computing the
ratio of the mean hedging demand over the mean total demand, as in Campbell and Viceira
(1999).34 This ratio depends only on the correlation ρ, the speed of mean-reversion λ and
the instantaneous variance of the state variable ν for a given time-horizon T −t. Table 2.2
34The ratio of the hedging demand over the total demand is stochastic and depends on the state variable
Xt. Therefore, as a tractable quantitative assessment of the percentage hedging demand, we follow Campbell
and Viceira and consider the mean hedging demand over the mean total demand, which is deterministic.
104


=== PDF PAGE 106 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
reports the percentage mean hedging demand for varying levels of correlation, speed of
mean-reversion parameter and the investor’s horizon. The parameter values are taken from
the estimates provided by Wachter (2002) and are described in the caption of Table 2.2.
Inspection of Table 2.2 establishes the percentage mean hedging demand over mean
total demand to be positive and fairly large, ranging from 17.9% to 84.4% for the parameter
estimates ρ = −0.93 and λ = 0.27 (in bold).
This result is primarily due to the large
negative correlation ρ, which implies (on average) a positive and large hedging demand. Our
ﬁnding is consistent with that reported in the literature under a similar economic setting but
with diﬀerent investor preferences. Campbell and Viceira (1999) ﬁnd the percentage mean
hedging demand to range from 22.9% to 65.5% for an inﬁnitely lived recursive-utility investor
with relative risk aversion and elasticity of intertemporal substitution ranging [1.5,40] and
[1/0.75,1/40], respectively. Results in Brandt (1999) conﬁrm the ﬁndings of Campbell and
Viceira for the case of CRRA preferences with relative risk aversion 5. A large hedging
demand in proportion to wealth is also reported in Wachter (2002).
2.4.
Extensions and Ramiﬁcations
In this Section, we demonstrate that the baseline analysis of Section 2.2 can easily be adopted
to alternative or richer economic environments. Section 2.4.1 illustrates our methodology
in a discrete-time framework, and provides an explicit solution to the stochastic-volatility
model in discrete time. Sections 2.4.2 – 2.4.3 demonstrate that the results of Section 2.2
are readily extendable to more realistic environments with stochastic interest rates and with
multiple stocks, state variables and sources of uncertainty.
2.4.1.
Discrete-Time Formulation
We consider the mean-variance asset allocation problem in a discrete-time setting.
The
extant literature, to our best knowledge, lacks analytic expressions for multi-period discrete-
time investment policies in rich stochastic environments and characterizes optimal policies
by employing either numerical methods or various approximations (e.g., Ait-Sahalia and
105


=== PDF PAGE 107 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Brandt, 2001; Bansal and Kiku, 2007; Brandt, Goyal, Santa-Clara and Stroud, 2005; Brandt
and Santa-Clara, 2006; Campbell and Viceira, 1999, 2002, among others). In contrast, we
here derive a recursive representation for the optimal investment policy in discrete time and
provide fully-explicit closed-form solutions for speciﬁc stochastic investment opportunity
sets as in the continuous-time formulation. To our knowledge, these explicit solutions are
new in the literature.35
We let the time increment denote ∆t ≡T/M, where M is an integer number, and index
time by t = 0, ∆t, 2∆t, ..., T. The uncertainty is generated by two correlated discrete-time
stochastic processes w and wX, with correlation ρ. The increments of the processes, ∆wt
and ∆wXt, are serially uncorrelated and distributed according to some distribution with
zero mean and variance ∆t, D(0, ∆t). An investor trades in two securities, a riskless bond
that provides a constant interest rate r over the interval ∆t, and a risky stock that has price
dynamics given by
∆St
St
= µ(St, Xt, t)∆t + σ(St, Xt, t)∆wt,
where the state variable X follows the process
∆Xt = m(Xt, t)∆t + ν(Xt, t)∆wXt.
An investor’s wealth W then follows
∆Wt = [rWt + θt(µt −r)]∆t + θtσt∆wt,
(182)
where θt again denotes the dollar stock investment. The investor maximizes the objective
function (138) subject to the dynamic budget constraint (182) for each time t = 0, ∆t, ..., T −
∆t. Proposition 2.5 is the discrete-time analogue of Proposition 2.1 and provides a recursive
representation for the optimal investment policy in terms of the anticipated portfolio gains,
ft = Et[W ∗
T ] −WtRT−t. The proof is similarly based on deriving the Bellman equation
in discrete-time. Not surprisingly though, since the anticipated gains process cannot be
35Since the purpose of this Section is to demonstrate the tractability of our analysis in discrete time, we
employ a simple Euler discretization scheme and abstract away from potential issues of convergence of our
discrete-time stochastic processes to their continuous-time analogues.
106


=== PDF PAGE 108 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
represented in diﬀerential form in discrete-time, the optimal policy is characterized not in
terms of partial derivatives of f, but in terms of its time-t conditional covariance with
one-period stock returns.
Proposition 2.5. The optimal stock investment policy of a dynamic mean-variance opti-
mizer in discrete-time is given by
θ∗
t = µt −r
γσ2
t
R−(T−∆t−t) −covt(∆St/St, ∆ft)
σ2
t ∆t
R−(T−∆t−t),
(183)
where process ft represents the expected total gains or losses from the stock investment and
is given by
f(St, Xt, t) = Et
"T−∆t
X
s=t
θ∗
s(µs −r)R(T−∆t−s)∆t
#
,
(184)
R = (1 + r∆t)1/∆t and t = 0, ∆t, ..., T −∆t.
The discrete-time optimal investment policy has the same structure as in Proposition
2.1 and is given by myopic and hedging demands. The absence of a discrete-time version
of the Feynman-Kac formula, however, does not allow us to characterize the optimal policy
entirely in terms of the exogenous model parameters, as in Proposition 2.2. Nevertheless,
expression (183) can be used to obtain an explicit representation for the optimal policy for
speciﬁc applications either by solving (183) backwards or by guessing the structure of the
solution.
To illustrate an application of Proposition 2.5, we solve the discrete-time versions of the
models of Sections 2.3.2–2.3.3. Speciﬁcally, the discrete-time dynamics of the stock price
and state variable for the stochastic-volatility model are speciﬁed as follows:
∆St
St
=
(r + δX(1+β)/2β
t
)∆t + X1/2β
t
∆wt,
(185)
∆Xt
=
λ( ¯X −Xt)∆t + ¯ν
p
Xt∆wXt,
(186)
where β̸ = 0 and λ > 0. In discrete time, there is a probability that Xt hits the zero-
boundary even with a non-explosive process. To exclude this, we assume that either the
interval ∆t is so small that this event has negligible probability or the distribution func-
tion of ∆wt and ∆wXt is truncated in such a way that it never happens. To obtain the
107


=== PDF PAGE 109 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
optimal investment policy explicitly, we ﬁrst conjecture that the solution has the form
θ∗
t = g(t)X(β−1)/2β
t
R−(T−∆t−t), where g(t) is a deterministic function. Substituting this
expression into the recursive representation (183) gives a recursive equation for the function
g(t) that can be solved explicitly.
The discrete-time dynamics of the stock price and state variable for the time-varying
Gaussian mean returns model are given by:
∆St
St
=
(r + σXt)∆t + σ∆wt,
(187)
∆Xt
=
λ( ¯X −Xt)∆t + ν∆wXt,
(188)
where λ > 0.
Campbell and Viceira (1999) consider a discrete-time version of these
dynamics and derive optimal policies under recursive utility by employing log-linear ap-
proximations.
To obtain an explicit solution we conjecture that it has the form θ∗
t =
Xt/γσ −(g1(t) + g2(t)Xt)/γσ, where g1(t) and g2(t) are deterministic functions. Substitut-
ing θ∗
t into representation (183), as in the previous case, we obtain recursive equations for
g1(t) and g2(t) which we solve explicitly. Corollary 2.4 reports the results.
Corollary 2.4. The optimal investment policy for the discrete-time stochastic-volatility
model (185)–(186) is given by
θ∗
t = δ
γ X(β−1)/2β
t
R−(T−∆t−t)−ρ¯νδ1 −(1 −(λ + ρ¯νδ)∆t)(T−∆t−t)/∆t
λ + ρ¯νδ
δ
γ X(β−1)/2β
t
R−(T−∆t−t),
(189)
and for the discrete-time model with Gaussian mean-returns (187)–(188) is given by
θ∗
t = Xt
γσR−(T−∆t−t) −g1(t) + g2(t)Xt
γσ
R−(T−∆t−t),
(190)
where
g1(t)
=
(A + B)

1 −[(1 −λ∆t)(1 −ρν∆t)](T−∆t−t)/∆t
−B

1 −[(1 −λ∆t)2(1 −2ρν∆t)](T−∆t−t)/∆t
,
g2(t)
=

1 −(1 −(1 −λ∆t)2)(1 + 2ρνλ∆t)
1 −(1 −λ∆t)2(1 −2ρν∆t)

1 −[(1 −λ∆t)2(1 −2ρν∆t)](T−∆t−t)/∆t
,
and A and B are constants, explicitly reported in the Appendix.
108


=== PDF PAGE 110 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
It can be veriﬁed that as time interval ∆t approaches zero, the discrete-time policies
converge to the continuous-time ones reported in Corollaries 2.2 and 2.3. As a result, the
comparative statics for (189) and (190) are similar to those in the continuous-time case.
We note that in deriving expressions (189) and (190), we do not assume normality of the
stochastic processes w and wX, as in continuous-time.
2.4.2.
Multiple Stock Formulation
We now generalize the baseline analysis of Section 2.2 with a single stock and state variable
to the case of multiple stocks and state variables. Speciﬁcally, uncertainty is generated by
two multi-dimensional Brownian motions w = (w1, ..., wN)⊤and wX = (wX1, ..., wXK)⊤with
N × K correlation matrix ρ, where each element of the matrix ρ = {ρnm} represents the
correlation between the Brownian motions wn and wXm. An investor trades in a riskless bond
with a constant interest rate r and N risky stocks, and so the market is again potentially
incomplete. The stock prices, S = (S1, ..., SN)⊤, follow the dynamics
dSit
Sit
= µi(St, Xt, t)dt + σi(St, Xt, t)⊤dwt,
i = 1, ..., N,
where µi and σi are deterministic functions of S and K state variables, X = (X1, ..., XK)⊤,
which satisfy
dXjt = mj(Xt, t)dt + νj(Xt, t)⊤dwXt,
j = 1, ..., K.
We let µ ≡(µ1, ..., µN)⊤denote the vector of stock mean returns and σ ≡(σ1, ..., σN)⊤
the volatility matrix, assumed invertible, with each component σ = {σin} capturing the
covariance between the stock return and Brownian motion wn. Similarly, m ≡(m1, ..., mK)⊤
and ν ≡(ν1, ..., νK)⊤will denote the mean growth and the volatility matrix of the sate
variables X, respectively. The investor’s wealth follows
dWt = [rWt + θ⊤
t (µt −r)]dt + θ⊤
t σtdwt,
(191)
where θt = (θ1t, ..., θNt)⊤denotes the vector of dollar investments in the N stocks at time t.
The dynamic optimization problem of the investor is as in Section 2.2. For each time
t ∈[0, T], she maximizes the time-t objective function (138) subject to the dynamic budget
109


=== PDF PAGE 111 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
constraint (191). As in Section 2.2, the optimal policy is characterized in terms of the antic-
ipated portfolio gains, f, and arises from the HJB equation adjusted for time-inconsistency.
Proposition 2.6 generalizes Proposition 2.2 and reports the optimal investment and antici-
pated gains in terms of the model parameters and the hedge-neutral measure.
Proposition 2.6. The optimal investment policy in the multiple-stock economy is given by
θ∗
t = 1
γ (σtσ⊤
t )−1(µt −r)e−r(T−t) −

ISt
∂ft
∂S⊤
t
+ (νtρ⊤σ−1
t )⊤∂ft
∂X⊤
t

e−r(T−t),
(192)
where ISt is a diagonal N × N matrix with S1t, ..., SNt on the main diagonal, ∂ft/∂St and
∂ft/∂Xt denote the row-vectors of partial derivatives with respect to relevant variables. The
anticipated portfolio gains, f, can be represented as
f(St, Xt, t) = E∗
t
h Z T
t
1
γ (µs −r)⊤(σsσ⊤
s )−1(µs −r)ds
i
,
where E∗
t [·] denotes the expectation under the unique hedge-neutral measure P ∗on which
are deﬁned N-dimensional Brownian motion w∗and K-dimensional Brownian motion w∗
X
with correlation ρ, given by
dw∗
t = dwt + σ−1
t (µt −r)dt,
dw∗
Xt = dwXt + ρ⊤σ−1
t (µt −r)dt,
and measure P ∗is deﬁned by the Radon-Nikodym derivative
dP ∗
dP = e−1
2
R T
0 (µs−r)⊤(σsσ⊤
s )−1(µs−r)ds−
R T
0 (σ−1
s
(µs−r))
⊤dws.
The optimal investment policy (192) is given by myopic and intertemporal hedging
terms, retaining the structure of the single-stock case.
It can again be shown that the
hedging demands can be expressed in terms of the covariance of stock returns and anticipated
portfolio gains. Proposition 2.6 also identiﬁes the eﬀect of cross-correlations on the optimal
investment and reveals that the hedging term for one stock depends on the correlations
of other stocks with the state variables.
The optimal investment expression also allows
for some simple comparative statics with respect to the risk aversion parameter, interest
rate and stock volatility matrix with similar implications to those in Section 2.2. We can
110


=== PDF PAGE 112 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
also obtain expressions for optimal terminal wealth, its moments and the value function of
the mean-variance optimizer and identify the eﬀect of market incompleteness, as in Section
2.2.3.
2.4.3.
Stochastic Interest Rates
In this Section, we incorporate stochastic interest rates into our analysis and demonstrate
that the optimal policies can explicitly be computed as in the baseline model of Section
2.2. Speciﬁcally, we consider an incomplete-market economy with an additional source of
uncertainty generated by a Brownian motion wr that is correlated with Brownian motions
w and wX with correlations ρrS and ρrX, respectively. The locally riskless bond now has a
stochastic interest rate r that follows the dynamics
drt = µr(Xt, rt, t)dt + σr(Xt, rt, t)dwrt,
(193)
where µr and σr are deterministic functions of X and r. Furthermore, we allow the stock
price and state variable parameters µ, σ, m and ν to additionally depend on the interest
rate r.
In our analysis we take the bond as the numeraire so that all relevant quantities are in
terms of the bond price Bt = B0e
R t
0 rsds, as is common in various problems in ﬁnance. To
facilitate tractability, we employ the mean-variance criterion over terminal wealth in units
of this numeraire, which allows us to adopt our earlier solution method and characterize the
optimal policy in units of the numeraire, that is, ˜θt ≡θ∗
t /Bt.36 Proposition 2.7 reports our
results.
Proposition 2.7. The optimal investment policy in the economy with stochastic interest
rates is given by
˜θt = µt −rt
γσ2
t
−

St
∂ft
∂St
+ ρνt
σt
∂ft
∂Xt
+ ρrSσrt
σt
∂ft
∂rt

,
(194)
where ft is as in Proposition 2.2, but with r following (193).
36Otherwise, if the mean-variance criterion is over WT and the interest rate is stochastic, in contrast to
Lemma 2.1 the value function is not separable in Wt and the policy θ∗
t is no longer independent of Wt, which
makes the problem intractable.
111


=== PDF PAGE 113 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
The optimal policy (194) has the same structure as the baseline case. The main diﬀer-
ence is that the hedging term now additionally accounts for the interest rate ﬂuctuations by
incorporating the sensitivity of anticipated portfolio gains (f) to interest rates. As in Sec-
tion 2.3, the optimal policies may explicitly be computed for various stochastic investment
opportunities. We consider a simple application where all the ﬂuctuations in the investment
opportunities are driven by the stochastic interest rate r. In particular, the stock price
follows a geometric Brownian motion with constant parameters µ and σ, while the interest
rate follows a Vasicek model (Vasicek, 1977)
drt = λr(¯r −rt)dt + σrdwrt.
(195)
Along the lines of Corollaries 2.1–2.3, it can be demonstrated that the optimal policy is
given by
˜θt = µ −rt
γσ2
−ρrSσr
γσ

λr
1 −e−(λr−ρrSσr/σ)(T−t)
λr −ρrSσr/σ
2 µ −¯r
σ
+ 1 −e−2(λr−ρrSσr/σ)(T−t)
λr −ρrSσr/σ
µ −rt
σ

.
This policy is comparable to that of the case of time-varying Gaussian mean-returns (181)
in Section 2.3.3, but now additionally allows us to consider comparative statics with respect
to the parameters of the interest rate dynamics (195).
2.5.
Conclusion
Despite the popularity of the mean-variance criteria in multi-period problems in ﬁnance,
little is known about the dynamically optimal mean-variance portfolio policies. This work
makes a step in this direction by providing a fully analytical characterization of the optimal
mean-variance policies within a familiar, dynamic, incomplete-market setting. The optimal
mean-variance dynamic portfolios are shown to have a simple, intuitive and tractable struc-
ture. The solution is obtained via dynamic programming and is facilitated by deriving a
recursive formulation for the mean-variance criteria, accounting for its time-inconsistency.
We also identify a “hedge-neutral” measure that absorbs intertemporal hedging demands
and allows explicit computation of optimal portfolios in a straightforward way for various
stochastic environments.
112


=== PDF PAGE 114 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Given the tractability oﬀered by our analysis, we believe that our results are well suited
for various applications in ﬁnancial economics. For example, portfolio selection problems
in incomplete markets are notoriously hard to solve, and it may be very convenient for
future applications to have a reasonable criterion for which the solution can actually be
computed.
In our ongoing work, we extend the current study to an incomplete market
setting where the investment opportunities may also experience jumps and again discover
much tractability in the ensuing analysis. We also foresee potential applications in security
pricing with incomplete markets, for which the investor preferences are to be accounted for.
113


=== PDF PAGE 115 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
2.6.
Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Lemma 2.1.
We ﬁrst demonstrate equation (141).
Using Itˆo’s Lemma we
rewrite the budget constraint (135) as
d(Wter(T−t)) = θt(µt −r)er(T−t)dt + θtσter(T−t)dwt.
(196)
Integrating (196) from t + τ to T and assuming that the investor follows the optimal policy
θ∗
s from t + τ onwards we obtain
Et+τ[W ∗
T ] = Wt+τer(T−t−τ) + ft+τ,
(197)
where W ∗
T is optimal wealth given the optimal policy θ∗
s, s ≥t + τ, and ft is given by (143).
Substituting (197) into (140) and noting that Wter(T−t) and ft are adapted to the ﬁltration
Ft, we obtain (141).
The HJB equation in diﬀerential form (144) follows from equation (141) when the deci-
sion making interval, τ, tends to zero. To derive the terminal condition for JT , we note that
varT [WT ] = 0 and ET [WT ] = WT . The deﬁnition of the value function, JT , then implies
JT = WT .
To show that Wt does not aﬀect θ∗
t , we integrate (196) from t to T and substitute WT
into the time-t objective function:
Et[WT ] −γ
2vart[WT ]
=
Wter(T−t) + Et
Z T
t
θs(µs −r)er(T−s)ds

−
γ
2vart
Z T
t
θs(µs −r)er(T−s)ds +
Z T
t
θsσser(T−s)dws

.(198)
It can be observed from (198) that the objective function is separable in Wter(T−t), and
hence the optimal policy θ∗
s does not depend on Wt for s ≥t. Since the investor solves for
the investment policy by backwards induction, θ∗
s also does not depend on Ws for s > t. Due
to the Markovian nature of the economy, θ∗
t depends only on St, Xt and t. The fact that
the function ft depends only on St, Xt and t follows from the expression for ft in terms of
the optimal policy, given in (143). The separability of the value function Jt from Wter(T−t)
follows from (198).
Q.E.D.
114


=== PDF PAGE 116 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Proof of Proposition 2.1.
To prove Proposition 2.1, it remains to derive the ﬁrst order
condition for the problem (147).37 The objective function in (147) is quadratic and concave
in θt, and so the unique optimal policy solves the ﬁrst order condition:
(µt −r)er(T−t) −γθ∗
t σ2
t e2r(T−t) −γσt

σtSt
∂ft
∂St
+ ρνt
∂ft
∂Xt

er(T−t) = 0,
leading to the expression (148).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2.2.
Under standard conditions, there exists a probability measure
P ∗under which the function ft admits the Feynman-Kac representation (153) (Karatzas
and Shreve, 1991) and under this measure, the processes S and X satisfy the stochastic
diﬀerential equations (154). Comparing (154) with (133)–(134), we obtain that measure P ∗
transforms Brownian motions wt and wXt into w∗
t and w∗
Xt satisfying (156).
We next ﬁnd the Radon-Nikodym derivative dP ∗/dP. To apply Girsanov’s Theorem
(Karatzas and Shreve, 1991), we ﬁrst decompose the Brownian motion wX as a sum of
two uncorrelated Brownian motions: dwXt = ρdwt +
p
1 −ρ2d ˜wt, where ˜wt = (wXt −
ρwt)/
p
1 −ρ2. We observe that in terms of d ˜wt, the representations (156) can be rewritten
as follows:
dw∗
t = dwt + µt −r
σt
dt,
dw∗
Xt = ρ

dwt + µt −r
σt
dt

+
p
1 −ρ2d ˜wt.
Since measure P ∗aﬀects only the ﬁrst component of the two-dimensional Brownian motion
(wt, ˜wt)⊤, the Radon-Nikodym derivative (157) obtains by Girsanov’s Theorem. Finally,
substituting ft given by (155) into the recursive representation (148), we obtain (158).
Q.E.D.
37The proof of Proposition 2.1 implicitly assumes that f(St, Xt, t) is twice diﬀerentiable and
Et
Z τ
t
ν2
s
 ∂fs
∂Xs
2
+ (σsSs)2
 ∂fs
∂Ss
2
ds

< ∞.
These conditions justify the computation of the variance term in (146) (e.g., Karatzas and Shreve, 1991)
which yields the HJB equation (147), and can be veriﬁed in the speciﬁc applications of Section 2.3 where
the process ft is computed explicitly.
115


=== PDF PAGE 117 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Proof of Proposition 2.3.
First, we derive the terminal wealth expression. Substituting
the optimal policy θ∗
t from (148) into (196) and rearranging terms we obtain
d(Wter(T−t)) = −dft + µt −r
γσt
dwt +
p
1 −ρ2νt
∂ft
∂Xt
d ˜wt,
(199)
where ˜wt is deﬁned in Proposition 2.3. Integrating (199) from t to T, we obtain (161). Since
˜wt and wt are uncorrelated, the variance of terminal wealth is given by
vart[W ∗
T ] = vart
1
γ
Z T
t
µs −r
σs
dws

+ vart
p
1 −ρ2
Z T
t
νs
∂fs
∂Xs
d ˜ws

,
which leads to expression (162). The expressions for Et[W ∗
T ] and Jt are immediate.
We next prove assertions (i)–(iii). Property (i) follows from the wealth variance expres-
sion (162). Since (µt −r)/σt is assumed to not depend on St, the ﬁrst term in (162) does not
depend on the correlation ρ. The second term is strictly positive in incomplete markets and
vanishes in complete markets, ρ2 = 1, and hence the assertion. To prove property (ii) we
compute the derivative of ft with respect to correlation ρ in terms of the hedging demand.
Since (µt −r)/σt depends only on Xt, ft in (155) also depends only on Xt. As a result, the
PDE (152) for ft becomes:
∂ft
∂t +

mt −ρνt
µt −r
σt
 ∂ft
∂Xt
+ ν2
t
2
∂2ft
∂X2
t
+ 1
γ
µt −r
σt
2
= 0,
(200)
with fT = 0. Diﬀerentiating (200) with respect to ρ and denoting ˜ft ≡∂ft/∂ρ, we obtain
the equation for ˜ft:
∂˜ft
∂t +

mt −ρνt
µt −r
σt
 ∂˜ft
∂Xt
+ ν2
t
2
∂2 ˜ft
∂X2
t
−νt
µt −r
σt
∂ft
∂Xt
= 0,
(201)
where ˜fT = 0. Applying the Feynman-Kac Theorem to equation (201), using the expression
(150) for θHt and the fact that ft does not depend on St we obtain:
∂ft
∂ρ = 1
ρE∗
t
Z T
t
θHs(µs −r)er(T−s)ds

.
As a result, if θHs > 0 for s ∈[t, T], function ft is increasing (decreasing) in ρ when ρ is
positive (negative). This is equivalent to saying that ft is increasing in ρ2. Conversely, if
θHs < 0 for s ∈[t, T], ft is decreasing in ρ2.
116


=== PDF PAGE 118 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
The proof of Assertion (iii) follows from (i) and (ii). If the hedging demand is positive
over the horizon, the expected terminal wealth is lower in incomplete markets, while the
variance is higher. As a result, the value function is unambiguously lower in this case.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2.4.
The optimal pre-commitment terminal wealth ˆWT solves the
ﬁrst order condition
1 −γ ˆWT + γE0[ ˆWT ] −ψξT = 0,
(202)
where ψ is the Lagrange multiplier of the static budget constraint (167). Taking time-zero
expectation on both sides of (202) yields ψ = 1/E0[ξT ], or ψ = erT , since E0[ξT erT ] = 1.
Substituting ψ back into (202) we obtain
ˆWT = 1
γ

1 + γE0[ ˆWT ] −ξT erT 
.
(203)
(203) substituted into the static budget constraint (167) leads to γE0[ ˆWT ] = γW0erT −1 +
E0[ξ2
T ]e2rT , which along with (203) yields the optimal terminal wealth (168).
With a constant market price of risk, (µ−r)/σ, E0[ξ2
T ] = e−2rT+( µ−r
σ )2T leading to (169).
To compute the pre-commitment investment policy, ˆθt, we ﬁrst consider the optimal time-t
wealth:
ˆWt = Et
ξT
ξt
ˆWT

= a(t) −1
γ e−(2r−(µ−r)2/σ2)(T−t)erT ξt,
(204)
where the second equality follows by substituting ˆWT from (169) and evaluating the moments
of ξT , and a(t) is a deterministic function of time. Applying Itˆo’s Lemma to (204) and using
dξt = −ξt[rdt + (µ −r)/σdwt] yields:
d ˆWt = (a′(t) −b(t)ξt)dt + µ −r
γσ e−(2r−(µ−r)2/σ2)(T−t)erT ξtdwt,
where b(t) is a time-deterministic function.
Matching the coeﬃcients with the dynamic
budget constraint (135) yields ˆθt in (170).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 2.1.
In the case of a complete market, measure P ∗coincides with the
risk-neutral one. To compute the optimal investment policy from Proposition 2.2, we need to
117


=== PDF PAGE 119 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
evaluate the expected squared market price of risk, E∗
t [(µs −r)2/σ2
s], under the risk-neutral
measure. Since the squared market price of risk in the CEV model is (µ −r)2/(¯σ2Sα
t ), we
need to determine g(t, s) ≡E∗
t [S−α
s
] for s > t. By Itˆo’s Lemma, the process for S−α
t
under
the risk-neutral measure satisﬁes:
dS−α
t
=

−αrS−α
t
+ α(1 + α)¯σ2
2

dt −α¯σS−α
t
dw∗
t .
(205)
Integrating (205) from t to s and taking the time-t expectation under the risk-neutral mea-
sure on both sides, we obtain the equation for g(t, s):
g(t, s) = S−α
t
−
Z s
t

αrg(t, y) −α(1 + α)¯σ2
2

dy.
(206)
Diﬀerentiating (206) with respect to s yields the linear diﬀerential equation
∂g(t, s)
∂s
= −αrg(t, s) + α(1 + α)¯σ2
2
,
(207)
with initial condition g(t, t) = S−α
t
. The unique solution to equation (207) is given by
g(t, s) = S−α
t
e−αr(s−t) + (1 + α)¯σ2 1 −e−αr(s−t)
2r
.
(208)
Substitution of (208) into the optimal investment policy (158) leads to the θ∗
t reported
in Corollary 2.1. We also note that the process for the market price of risk is explosive
for α ≤−1 since the conditional expectation (208) is unbounded for large horizons. For
−1 < α < 0, the conditional expectation (208) is not well-deﬁned since it may become
negative for large investment horizons, implying that the process hits the zero-boundary
with a positive probability.
Property (i) is immediate from the expression for the optimal investment policy (175).
Property (ii) follows from (175) and the fact that the hedging demand is negative for α < 0.
Finally, property (iii) can be demonstrated by observing that the derivative of θ∗
t with
respect to the time-horizon is negative for α ≤−1 and µ > r > 0, and can both be negative
or positive otherwise, depending on the horizon, T −t.
Q.E.D.
118


=== PDF PAGE 120 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Proof of Corollary 2.2.
Since the squared market price of risk is equal to δ2Xt, ﬁnding
θ∗
t amounts to evaluating E∗
t [Xs]. It follows from (154) that the state variable under measure
P ∗follows the process
dXt = (λ + ρ¯νδ)

λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯νδ −Xt

dt + ¯ν
p
Xtdw∗
Xt,
for which the conditional moments are well-known (e.g., Cox, Ingersoll and Ross, 1985),
yielding
E∗
t [Xs] =
λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯νδ +

Xt −
λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯νδ

e−(λ+ρ¯νδ)(s−t).
(209)
Substituting (209) into (158) yields the desired result.
Assertion (i) follows from the fact that (1 −e−(λ+ρ¯νδ)(T−t))/(λ + ρ¯νδ) is always pos-
itive. As a result, the sign of the hedging demand (second term in (178)) depends only
on the correlation. Assertion (ii) for the case of ρ < 0 is immediate from the fact that
the hedging demand is positive in this case.
For ρ > 0, it follows from the fact that
ρ¯νδ(1 −e−(λ+ρ¯νδ)(T−t))/(λ + ρ¯νδ) is less than unity. Property (iii) follows directly from the
properties of function X(β−1)/β. Assertion (iv) obtains due to the fact that the derivative
of θ∗
t with respect to the time-horizon is positive for λ + r + ρ¯νδ < 0, negative for ρ¯νδ > 0,
and can both be negative or positive otherwise, depending on the horizon.
Turning to property (v), we ﬁrst prove that ft decreases in correlation ρ. Since ft =
δ2 R T
t E∗
t [Xs]ds, it remains to show that E∗
t [Xs] decreases in ρ. We observe that by virtue of
(209), E∗
t [Xs] =
R s
t e−(λ+ρ¯νδ)(y−t)dy+Xte−(λ+ρ¯νδ)(s−t), which is clearly decreasing in correla-
tion ρ. Similarly, using Proposition 2.3, it can be shown that the variance of terminal wealth
can be represented as vart[W ∗
T ] = (1 −ρ2)G(ρ), where G(ρ) ≡Et[
R T
t ¯ν2Xs(∂fs/∂Xs)2ds] is
a positive decreasing function of ρ. Clearly, the minimum is attained in a complete market
with ρ2 = 1. The ﬁrst order condition for ﬁnding the ρ∗at which vart[W ∗
T ] is maximized is
2ρG(ρ) = (1 −ρ2)G′(ρ). Since the right-hand-side is negative and G(ρ) is positive, the ﬁrst
order condition can only be satisﬁed for ρ∗< 0.
Q.E.D.
119


=== PDF PAGE 121 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Proof of Corollary 2.3.
Since the squared market price of risk is X2
t , ﬁnding the optimal
investment policy amounts to computing E∗
t [X2
s ], which is well-known (e.g., Vasicek, 1977):
E∗
t [X2
s ] =

λ ¯X
λ + ρν +

Xt −
λ ¯X
λ + ρν

e−(λ+ρν)(s−t)2
+ ν2 1 −e−2(λ+ρν)(s−t)
2(λ + ρν)
.
(210)
Substituting (210) into (158) yields the reported result.
Property (i) follows from the fact that since the unconditional expectation of the state
variable, ¯X, is assumed positive, the sign of the mean hedging demand depends only on the
sign of the correlation ρ. To show property (ii), we observe that the optimal investment
policy can be rewritten as follows:
θ∗
t =

1 −ρν 1 −e−2(λ+ρν)(T−t)
λ + ρν
Xt
γσe−r(T−t) −ρνλ
γσ
1 −e−(λ+ρν)(T−t)
λ + ρν
2 ¯Xe−r(T−t).
Similarly to the proof of Corollary 2.2(ii), it can be shown that 1−ρν(1 −e−2(λ+ρν)(T−t))/(λ + ρν)
is positive, which then implies that θ∗
t is increasing in the market price of risk Xt. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2.5.
The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 2.1. The ﬁrst
step is to derive the Bellman equation adjusted for time-inconsistency in terms of anticipated
gains, f. The second step is to derive the ﬁrst order condition for the strategy θ∗
t . In discrete
time, however, the explicit representation for the process for ft is not available. As a result,
the optimal strategy is in terms of covt(∆St/St, ∆ft).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 2.4.
The ﬁrst step is to obtain the anticipated gains process f.
Substituting the conjecture θ∗
t = g(t)X(β−1)/2β
t
R−(T−∆t−t) for the stochastic-volatility model
(185)–(186) into the expression for ft (184), we obtain:
ft = Et
hT−∆t
X
s=t
δXsg(s)∆t
i
.
(211)
To compute Et[Xs], we take expectations of both sides of the state variable process, (186),
and obtain a diﬀerence equation for Et[Xs]:
Et[Xs+∆t] = λ ¯X∆t + (1 −λ∆t)Et[Xs],
(212)
120


=== PDF PAGE 122 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
with initial condition Et[Xt] = Xt. The unique solution to equation (212) is
Et[Xs] = (Xt −¯X)(1 −λ∆t)(s−t)/∆t + ¯X.
(213)
Substituting (213) into (211) yields:
ft = d(t) + δXt
T−∆t
X
s=t
g(s)(1 −λ∆t)(s−t)/∆t∆t,
(214)
where d(t) denotes a time-deterministic function. Using (214), we compute ∆ft and substi-
tute it into the recursive expression for the optimal strategy (183). Taking into account the
conjecture for θ∗
t , after some algebra we obtain a recursive equation for g(t):
g(t) = δ/γ −ρ¯νδ
T−∆t
X
s=t+∆t
g(s)(1 −λ∆t)(s−∆t−t)/∆t∆t.
(215)
Evaluating (215) at time t −∆t and then subtracting it from (215), we obtain the following
forward diﬀerence equation for g(t): g(t −∆t) = λδ∆t/γ + (1 −(λ + ρ¯νδ∆t)g(t)) , with
condition g(T −∆t) = δ/γ. The explicit solution to this equation is
g(t) = δ
γ −ρ¯νδ1 −(1 −(λ + ρ¯νδ)∆t)T−∆t−t
λ + ρ¯νδ
δ
γ ,
which then yields the reported result.
For the case of Gaussian mean-returns dynamics (187)–(188), we ﬁrst obtain ft by sub-
stituting our conjecture θ∗
t = Xt/γσ −(g1(t) + g2(t)Xt)/γσ into (184). Then, substituting
ft into (183) we obtain recursive equations for g1(t) and g2(t). Solving them as in the pre-
vious stochastic-volatility case we obtain g1(t) and g2(t), as reported in Corollary 2.4, with
constants A and B explicitly given by
A
=
ρν(1 −λ∆t)(2 ¯X −ϕν2λ∆t
√
∆t)∆t
1 −(1 −λ∆t)(1 −ρν∆t)
−ϕν2λ∆t
√
∆t
−

1 −(1 −(1 −λ∆t)2)(1 + 2ρνλ∆t)
1 −(1 −λ∆t)2(1 −2ρν∆t)

¯X −ϕν
√
∆t
2ρ
+ ρν(1 −λ∆t)( ¯X + ϕν
√
∆t/2ρ)∆t
1 −(1 −λ∆t)(1 −ρν∆t)

,
B
=

ρν(1 −λ∆t)( ¯X + ϕν
√
∆t/2ρ)∆t
(1 −λ∆t)2(1 −2ρν∆t) −(1 −λ∆t)(1 −ρν∆t)
+ ¯X −ϕν
√
∆t
2ρ

1 −(1 −(1 −λ∆t)2)(1 + 2ρνλ∆t)
1 −(1 −λ∆t)2(1 −2ρν∆t)

,
where ϕ = cov(∆w, ∆w2
X).38
Q.E.D.
38It can easily be demonstrated that ϕ = 0 if ∆w and ∆wX are normally distributed.
121


=== PDF PAGE 123 ===
Chapter 2: Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation
Proof of Proposition 2.6.
The proof is a multi-dimensional version of the proofs for
Propositions 2.1–2.2.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2.7.
The proof is similar to those of Propositions 2.1–2.2, but now
accounting for the mean-variance criterion being over WT /BT . As in the proof of Lemma
2.1, substituting the integral representation for WT /BT into the criterion we show that ˜θt
does not depend on Wt/Bt. Then, as in Section 2.2 we obtain an HJB equation in terms of
dft and d(Wt/Bt), where ft ≡Et[W ∗
T /BT ]−Wt/Bt, whose solution yields (194). Employing
measure P ∗it can be shown that ft is the same as in Proposition 2.2, but now with stochastic
rt.
Q.E.D.
122


=== PDF PAGE 124 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
3.
Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple So-
lution
3.1.
Introduction
Perfect hedging is a risk management activity that aims to eliminate risk completely. In
theory, perfect hedges are possible via dynamic trading in frictionless complete markets
and are obtained by standard no-arbitrage methods (e.g., Cvitanic and Zapatero, 2004).
In reality, however, “perfect hedges are rare,” as simply put by Hull (2008). Despite the
unprecedented development in the menu of ﬁnancial instruments available, market frictions
render markets incomplete, making perfect hedging impossible. Consequently, hedging in
incomplete markets has much occupied the profession. The traditional, pragmatic approach
is to employ static minimum-variance hedges (e.g., Stulz, 2003; McDonald, 2006; Hull, 2008)
or the corresponding myopic hedges that repeat the static ones over time. While intuitive
and tractable, these hedges are not necessarily optimal in multi-period settings and may
lead to signiﬁcant welfare losses (e.g., Brandt, 2003).
Moreover, they do not generally
provide perfect hedges in dynamically complete markets. The alternative route is to consider
richer dynamic incomplete-market settings and characterize hedges that maximize a hedger’s
preferences or provide the best hedging quality. The latter is measured by various criteria
in terms of means and variances of the hedging error, as given by the deviation of the
hedge from its target value. Despite much work, the literature still lacks tractable dynamic
hedges in plausible stochastic environments, with explicit solutions arising in a few settings
(typically with constant means and volatilities of pertinent processes).
In this paper, we provide tractable dynamically optimal hedges in a general incomplete-
market economy by employing the minimum-variance criterion. We demonstrate that these
hedges retain the basic structure of perfect hedges, as well as the intuitive elements of the
static minimum-variance hedges. Towards that, we consider a hedger who is concerned with
reducing the risk of a non-tradable or illiquid asset, or a contingent claim at some future
date. Notable examples include various commodities, human capital, housing, commercial
123


=== PDF PAGE 125 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
properties, various ﬁnancial liabilities, executive stock options. The market is incomplete
in that the hedger cannot take an exact oﬀsetting position to the non-tradable asset pay-
oﬀby dynamically trading in the available securities, a bond and a stock (or futures or
any other derivative) that is correlated with the non-tradable.
We employ the familiar
minimum-variance criterion for the quality of the hedging but considerably diﬀer from the
literature in that we account for the time-inconsistency of this criterion and obtain the
solution by dynamic programming. We here follow a methodology developed in the con-
text of dynamic mean-variance portfolio choice in Chapter 2.
In dynamically complete
markets, there is no time-inconsistency issue (unlike the problem in Chapter 2) and our
dynamically optimal minimum-variance hedges reduce to perfect hedges, unlike their static
or myopic counterparts. In incomplete markets, we show that the variance criterion be-
comes time-consistent only when the stock has zero risk premium or when considered under
any risk-neutral probability measure (which is not unique here). Our dynamically optimal
hedge can then alternatively be obtained by minimizing such a criterion under a speciﬁc
risk-neutral measure.
We obtain a fully analytical characterization of the dynamically optimal minimum-
variance hedges in terms of the exogenous model parameters. The complete-market dynamic
hedge, obtained by no-arbitrage, is determined by the “Greeks” that quantify the sensitiv-
ities of the asset value under the unique risk-neutral measure to the pertinent stochastic
variables in the economy. Ours is given by generalized Greeks, still representing the as-
set value sensitivities to the same variables, but now in terms of an additional parameter
accounting for the market incompleteness and where the asset-value is under a speciﬁc risk-
neutral measure accounting for the hedging costs. The hedges are in terms of the Greeks
since, as we demonstrate, a higher variability of asset value implies a lower quality of hedg-
ing, and hence the need to account for asset-value sensitivities. We further demonstrate
the tractability and practical usefulness of our solution by explicitly computing the hedges
for plausible intertemporal economic environments with stochastic market prices of risk and
volatilities of non-tradable asset and stock returns.
124


=== PDF PAGE 126 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
We next compare the performances of our dynamically optimal hedges with those of the
minimum-variance hedges employed in the literature and practice. We quantify the relative
performance by the percentage increase or decrease in the expected hedging error variance
when the hedger switches from our hedge to the alternative one. Two popular alternatives
are the classic static hedge, initially minimizing the hedging error variance and subsequently
not readjusting, and the myopic hedge repeating over time the static one with small horizons.
These popular hedges are simply driven by the comovement of the stock return and the
non-tradable asset payoﬀover the relevant horizon. Our dynamic hedge inherits this basic
structure, but now tracking the comovement between the instantaneous stock return and
the non-tradable asset value under our risk-neutral measure, and so additionally capturing
the arrival of new information. Consequently, we show that our dynamic hedge typically
outperforms the static and myopic ones in plausible intertemporal settings for stock and
non-tradable asset dynamics, especially when there is predictability in the non-tradable
asset. Only in the special case of random walk processes do the static and myopic hedges
coincide with ours. We also compare our hedges with the dynamic hedges considered in the
literature that minimize the hedging error variance sitting at an initial date. These hedges,
which we refer to as the “pre-commitment” hedges, are generically diﬀerent from ours since
they do not account for the time-inconsistency of the variance criteria and the hedger may
deviate from them at later dates unless she can pre-commit to follow them. By deﬁnition,
a pre-commitment hedge outperforms ours at the initial date. We demonstrate that for a
one-year hedging horizon and plausible parameters, it requires less than half a year for our
hedge to start outperforming when the stock and the non-tradable asset follow geometric
Brownian motions (GBMs).
We generalize our basic framework to the case when the hedger additionally accounts
for the mean hedging error, trading it oﬀagainst the hedging error variance, as commonly
considered in the literature under static settings. We also relate this mean-variance hedging
to the benchmarking literature in which a money manager’s performance is evaluated relative
to that of a benchmark. We show that the dynamic hedge now has an additional speculative
125


=== PDF PAGE 127 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
component and additional hedging demands due to the anticipated speculative gains or
losses, as in the related literature. We also show that our main baseline results can easily
be extended to the case of multiple non-tradable assets and stocks.
The subject of hedging is, of course, prevalent in the literature on derivatives and risk
management. Major textbooks, Duﬃe (1989), Siegel and Siegel (1990), Stulz (2003), Cvi-
tanic and Zapatero (2004), McDonald (2006), Hull (2008), all present the classic static
minimum-variance hedging and demonstrate its usefulness for real-life risk management ap-
plications. Ederington (1979), Rolfo (1980), Figlewski (1984), Kamara and Siegel (1987),
Kerkvliet and Moﬀett (1991), In and Kim (2006) employ minimum-variance static hedges
and evaluate their quality in diﬀerent empirical applications. Kroner and Sultan (1993),
Lioui and Poncet (2000), Brooks, Henry and Persand (2002) study the performance and
economic implications of closely related myopic hedges. In an economy with a static mean-
variance hedger, Anderson and Danthine (1980, 1981) study futures hedging and evaluate its
impact on production, while Hirshleifer (1988) derives futures risk premia under transaction
costs. Roll (1992), Chan, Karceski and Lakonishok (1999), Costa and Paiva (2002), Jorion
(2003), Gomez and Zapatero (2003), Cornell and Roll (2005) employ static mean-variance
criteria and consider portfolio management with tracking error, deviation from a bench-
mark, which is just the opposite of hedging error. In the literature above, the hedger either
cannot rebalance her portfolio over time or is myopic and looks one period ahead only. This
limitation is underscored by Brandt (2003) who demonstrates that when hedging S&P 500
index options under CARA utility, the multi-period hedges can generate substantial welfare
gains.
A steadily growing strand of work investigates optimal dynamic hedges consistent with
a hedger’s utility maximization in typically continuous-time incomplete market settings.
Breeden (1984) provides optimal hedging policies with futures in terms of the value func-
tion for a general utility function over intertemporal consumption. Stultz (1984) derives
explicit optimal hedges with foreign currency forward contacts when the exchange rate fol-
lows a GBM and the hedger has logarithmic utility over intertemporal consumption. He
126


=== PDF PAGE 128 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
further argues that this hedger behaves like a myopic mean-variance one. Adler and De-
temple (1988) consider the hedging of a non-traded cash position for logarithmic utility
over terminal wealth and provide an explicit solution in complete markets, and a solution
in terms of the value function in incomplete markets. Svensson and Werner (1993), Tepla
(2000b) and Henderson (2005) study the optimal hedging of non-tradable income or assets
for general utility over intertemporal consumption or terminal wealth. To obtain explicit
solutions, these authors specialize to constant relative risk aversion (CARA) preferences,
GBM tradable asset prices and an income process following an arithmetic Brownian motion
(ABM), while Henderson additionally obtains hedges for GBM and mean-reverting incomes
in incomplete and compete markets, respectively. For more general processes or utilities,
the solutions in Svensson and Werner and Henderson are typically in terms of value func-
tions, while in Tepla in terms of sensitivities of tradable wealth with respect to asset and
state prices. Duﬃe, Fleming, Soner and Zariphopoulou (1997) and Viceira (2001) consider
the hedging of stochastic income with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences
and the tradable asset and income following GBMs and discrete-time lognormal processes,
respectively.
The former work demonstrates the existence of the solution in a feedback
form and derives its asymptotic behavior for large wealth, while the latter work derives a
log-linear approximation for the optimal policies in discrete time.
The rapidly growing so-called “mean-variance” hedging literature in dynamic incomplete
market settings studies optimal policies based on hedging error means and variances. A large
body of literature characterizes these hedges for a quadratic criterion over the hedging er-
ror. In the context of futures hedging, Duﬃe and Richardson (1991) provide explicit optimal
hedges that minimize the expected squared error when both the tradable and non-tradable
asset prices follow GBMs. Schweizer (1994) and Pham, Rheinlander and Schweizer (1998)
in a more general stochastic environment obtain a feedback representation for the optimal
policy. Gourieroux, Laurent and Pham (1998) derive hedges in terms of parameters from a
speciﬁc non-tradable asset payoﬀdecomposition, but are diﬃcult to obtain explicitly. Bert-
simas, Kogan and Lo (2001) solve the quadratic hedging problem via dynamic programming
127


=== PDF PAGE 129 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
and numerically compute the optimal hedges. Schweizer (2001) provides a comprehensive
survey of this literature with further references and notes that ﬁnding tractable optimal
quadratic hedges is still an open problem. To our best knowledge, with the exception of
Duﬃe and Richardson, there are no works that derive explicit quadratic hedges.
Duﬃe and Richardson (1991), Schweizer (1994), Musiela and Rutkowski (1998) solve the
dynamic minimum-variance hedging problem by reducing it to a quadratic one, thus char-
acterizing the pre-commitment hedges at an initial date from which the hedger may deviate
in the future. Duﬃe and Richardson and Bielecki, Jeanblanc and Rutkowski (2004) also
characterize the pre-commitment minimum-variance hedge subject to a constraint on the
mean hedging error. This literature, however, lacks explicit results in the case of stochastic
mean returns and volatilities, and explicit hedges are only obtained in Duﬃe and Richard-
son for GBM asset prices.
Duﬃe and Jackson (1990) derive explicit minimum-variance
hedges in futures markets under the special case of martingale futures prices, which makes
the hedging problem time-consistent. In the case of mean-variance hedging, by employing
backward induction, Anderson and Danthine (1983) obtain hedges in a simple three-period
production economy, while Duﬃe and Jackson (1989) in a two-period binomial model of
optimal innovation of futures contracts.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In Section 3.2, we describe the
economic setting and determine the dynamically optimal minimum-variance hedges via dy-
namic programming. We then explicitly compute these hedges in plausible environments
with stochastic mean returns and volatilities, and present the time-consistency conditions.
In Section 3.3, we compare our dynamically optimal hedge with the pre-commitment, static
and myopic hedges, while in Section 3.4, we generalize our baseline model to the case of
mean-variance hedging and the case of multiple assets. Section 3.5 concludes. Proofs are in
the Appendix.
3.2.
Dynamic Minimum-Variance Hedging
128


=== PDF PAGE 130 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
3.2.1.
Economic Setup
We consider a continuous-time incomplete-market Markovian economy with a ﬁnite horizon
[0, T].
The uncertainty is represented by a ﬁltered probability space (Ω, F, {Ft}, P), on
which are deﬁned two correlated Brownian motions, w and wX, with correlation ρ. All
stochastic processes are assumed to be well-deﬁned and adapted to {Ft, t ∈[0, T]}, the
augmented ﬁltration generated by w and wX.
An agent in this economy, henceforth the hedger, is committed to hold a non-tradable
asset with payoﬀXT at time T. The non-tradable asset can be interpreted in diﬀerent
ways depending on the application. The process X may represent the price of oil, copper
or other commodity that the hedger is committed to sell at time T, or may denote the
price of a company share that the hedger cannot trade so as to preserve company control.
Alternatively, the non-tradable asset may be interpreted as a ﬁrm or a project cash ﬂow,
the realization of which is deﬁned by the non-tradable state variable X, such as economic
conditions, temperature or precipitation level.39 Without loss of generality, we adopt the
ﬁrst interpretation and postulate the price of the non-tradable asset to follow the dynamics
dXt
Xt
= m(Xt, t)dt + ν(Xt, t)dwXt,
(216)
where the stochastic mean, m, and volatility, ν, are deterministic functions of X.
The
risk associated with holding the non-tradable asset can be hedged by continuous trading
in two securities, a riskless bond that provides a constant interest rate r and a tradable
risky security. Depending on the application, the risky security can be interpreted as a
stock, a futures contract or any other derivative security written on the non-tradable asset.
Accordingly, the mean and volatility of instantaneous returns on tradable security, which for
expositional simplicity we call the stock, in general may depend on the non-tradable asset
price, X. The dynamics for the stock price, S, is then modeled as
dSt
St
= µ(St, Xt, t)dt + σ(St, Xt, t)dwt,
(217)
39If the terminal payoﬀis a non-linear function of some state variable Y , h(YT ), one can always redeﬁne
the state variable to be Xt = Et[h(YT )], so that the terminal payoﬀis XT .
129


=== PDF PAGE 131 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
where the stochastic mean return, µ, and volatility, σ, are deterministic functions of S
and X. We will denote µt, σt, mt and νt as shorthand for the coeﬃcients in equations
(216)–(217).
The hedger chooses a hedging policy, θ, where θt denotes the dollar amount invested in
the stock at time t, given initial wealth W0. The hedger’s tradable wealth W then follows
the process
dWt = [rWt + θt(µt −r)] dt + θtσtdwt.
(218)
The market in this economy is incomplete in that it is impossible to hedge perfectly the
ﬂuctuations of the non-tradable asset by tradable wealth. Dynamic market completeness
obtains only in the special case of perfect correlation between the non-tradable asset and
stock returns, ρ = ±1, in which case the non-tradable asset can be replicated by stock
trading and the hedge portfolio uniquely determined by standard no-arbitrage methods.
Since perfect hedging is not possible in incomplete markets, the common approach in the
literature is to determine a hedging policy according to some criterion that determines the
quality of hedging.
The mean-variance hedging literature addresses this for hedging criteria based on the
mean and variance of the hedging error, XT −WT . The mean squared error, Et(XT −WT )2,
is a commonly employed measure for the quality of hedging from the class of mean-variance
criteria (e.g., Duﬃe and Richardson, 1991; Schweizer, 1994; Gourieroux, Laurent and Pham
1998; Bertsimas, Kogan and Lo, 2001, among others). In general, these quadratic hedges
have a complex structure in that they are derived either in a recursive feedback form (e.g.,
Schweizer, 1994; Pham, Rheinlander and Schweizer, 1998) or depend on parameters from
a speciﬁc decomposition of the non-tradable asset price X which are diﬃcult to obtain
explicitly (e.g., Gourieroux, Laurent and Pham, 1998). Duﬃe and Richardson provide an
explicit quadratic hedge for the special case of both the non-tradable asset and stock prices
following GBMs. However, for richer stochastic environments, quadratic hedging has failed
to produce tractable, explicit policies.
130


=== PDF PAGE 132 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Another natural criterion for the quality of hedging is the variance of the hedging error,
vart[XT −WT ], widely employed in static and myopic settings (analyzed in Sections 3.3.2–
3.3.3), as well as dynamic settings (e.g., Duﬃe and Richardson, 1991; Schweizer, 1994;
Musiela and Rutkowski, 1998; Bielecki, Jeanblanc and Rutkowski, 2004, among others).
This literature obtains the variance-minimizing policies primarily as a special case of the
quadratic hedging problem sitting at an initial date. The time-inconsistency of the variance
criterion, however, may induce the hedger to deviate from the initial policy at a later date,
as discussed in Section 3.2.4. Moreover, as in the quadratic case, the variance-minimizing
policies have not generally been obtained explicitly, with the notable exception being the
Duﬃe and Richardson case of both risky assets following GBMs.
In this paper, we employ the variance-minimizing criterion for the hedger whose problem
is
min
θ
vart[XT −WT ],
(219)
subject to the dynamic budget constraint (218). We solve this problem by dynamic pro-
gramming and hence provide the time-consistent dynamic hedging policy.
3.2.2.
Dynamically Optimal Hedging Policy
In this Section, we determine the dynamically optimal minimum variance hedges.
The
application of dynamic programming, however, is complicated by the fact that the variance
criterion is non-linear in the expectation operator and in general not time-consistent. To
address these problems, we follow the approach in Chapter 2 developed in the context of
dynamic mean-variance portfolio choice and derive a recursive formulation for the hedger’s
objective function, which yields the appropriate Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation
of dynamic programming.
Proposition 3.1 reports the optimal policy derived from the
solution to this equation and the resulting optimal quality of the hedge.
Proposition 3.1. The optimal hedging policy and the corresponding variance of the hedging
131


=== PDF PAGE 133 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
error are given by
θ∗
t
=
ρνt
σt
Xt
∂E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)]
∂Xt
+ St
∂E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)]
∂St
,
(220)
vart[XT −W ∗
T ]
=
(1 −ρ2)Et
hZ T
t
ν2
sX2
s
∂E∗
s[XT ]
∂Xs
2
ds
i
,
(221)
where W ∗
T is the terminal tradable wealth under the optimal hedging policy, and E∗
t [·] denotes
the expectation under the unique probability measure P ∗on which are deﬁned two Brownian
motions w∗
X and w∗with correlation ρ such that the processes for the non-tradable asset, X,
and stock price, S, are given by
dXt
Xt
=

mt −ρνt
µt −r
σt

dt + νtdw∗
Xt,
dSt
St
= rdt + σtdw∗
t ,
(222)
and the P ∗-measure is deﬁned by the Radon-Nikodym derivative
dP ∗
dP = e−1
2
R T
0 ( µs−r
σs
)2ds−
R T
0
µs−r
σs
dws.
(223)
Proposition 3.1 provides a simple, fully analytical characterization of the optimal hedging
policy in terms of the exogenous model parameters and a probability measure P ∗(discussed
below). We ﬁrst note that the optimal hedging policy (220) preserves the basic structure
of that in complete markets. Indeed, the perfect hedging policy in complete markets (with
ρ = ±1), obtained by standard no-arbitrage methods, is given by
θ∗
t = ρνt
σt
Xt
∂ERN
t
[XT e−r(T−t)]
∂Xt
+ St
∂ERN
t
[XT e−r(T−t)]
∂St
,
(224)
where ERN
t
[·] denotes the expectation under the unique risk-neutral measure and ERN
t
[XT e−r(T−t)]
represents the unique no-arbitrage value of the asset payoﬀXT . The complete-market dy-
namic hedge is comprised of the Greeks, given by the sensitivities of the time-t asset value to
the non-tradable asset and stock prices (X and S dynamics under the risk-neutral measure
are as in (222) with ρ = ±1). Thus, our dynamic hedge (220) is a simple generalization
of the complete-market perfect hedge, with the additional parameter ρ accounting for the
market incompleteness and the measure P ∗replacing the risk-neutral measure.
This is
132


=== PDF PAGE 134 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
in stark contrast to the optimal hedging policies obtained in the mean-variance hedging
literature which reduce to perfect hedges in complete markets but do not maintain their
intuitive structure in incomplete markets. Moreover, as demonstrated in Section 3.2.3, our
simple structure allows us to explicitly compute the optimal hedges under various stochastic
economic setups.
The probability measure P ∗naturally arises in our setting and facilitates much tractabil-
ity. To highlight the role of this measure, we note the following relation (as derived from
Proposition 3.1 in the Appendix) between the expected discounted non-tradable asset payoﬀ,
XT e−r(T−t), under the new and original measures:
E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)] = Et[XT e−r(T−t)] −Et[W ∗
T e−r(T−t) −Wt].
(225)
The residual term, Et[W ∗
T e−r(T−t)−Wt], represents the expected discounted gains in tradable
wealth that the hedger forgoes in order to hedge the non-tradable asset over the period
[t, T], that is, the cost of hedging. So, the right-hand side of (225) represents the expected
discounted terminal payoﬀnet of the hedging cost, while the left-hand side the expectation
under P ∗. In other words, the probability measure P ∗incorporates the hedging cost when
computing the expected discounted asset payoﬀ. Henceforth, we label P ∗as the “hedge-
neutral measure” (see Remark 1), and the quantity E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)] as the “hedge-neutral
value” of the payoﬀXT , analogously to the risk-neutral value in the complete-market case.
We further note that the hedge-neutral value can also be interpreted as the minimal time-t
value of a self-ﬁnancing minimum-variance hedging portfolio for which the expected hedging
error, Et[XT −W ∗
T ], is zero. To demonstrate this interpretation, we observe from (225) that
the expected hedging error is zero only if the initial value of the self-ﬁnancing portfolio equals
the expected discounted non-tradable asset payoﬀunder the hedge-neutral measure, that
is, Wt = E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)]. Since the hedge-neutral value is related to the expected hedging
error, the hedger guided by the minimum-variance criterion can achieve a better hedging
quality by accounting for the sensitivities of the hedge-neutral value. Hence, the hedges are
in terms of the hedge-neutral value sensitivities, which we interpret as the delta-hedges, as
in the standard analysis of the Greeks.
133


=== PDF PAGE 135 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
The quality of the optimal hedge, as measured by the variance of the hedging error
(221), also has a simple structure.
The hedging error variance is driven by the level of
market incompleteness, ρ2, and becomes zero in complete markets. Moreover, the quality of
the hedge decreases with higher volatility of the non-tradable asset, νt, or higher sensitivity
of the hedge-neutral value with respect to the asset price, ∂E∗
t [XT ]/∂Xt, since it becomes
more diﬃcult to hedge the non-tradable asset.
The optimal hedging policy (220) admits intuitive comparative statics with respect to the
model parameters. Assuming for simplicity that the market price of risk, (µt−r)/σt, is driven
by the variable Xt only, we see that the total investment in absolute terms, |θ∗
t |, is decreasing
in the stock price volatility, σt, because higher volatility makes hedging less eﬃcient. The
correlation parameter ρ has both a direct and an indirect eﬀect on the magnitude and sign
of the hedge. The direct eﬀect implies that the magnitude of the hedge is decreasing in
the absolute value of the correlation, |ρ|. Intuitively, for higher absolute correlation more
wealth is allocated to the stock as the hedge becomes more eﬃcient. This eﬀect is most
pronounced in complete markets when ρ = ±1, and the non-tradable asset can perfectly be
hedged. With zero correlation, ρ = 0, the direct eﬀect disappears as it becomes impossible to
hedge the non-tradable asset. The indirect eﬀect enters via the joint probability distribution
of the prices of tradable and non-tradable assets. This latter eﬀect, along with the eﬀects of
the non-tradable asset volatility, time horizon and market price of risk, can only be assessed
in speciﬁc examples for which the optimal hedge can explicitly be computed.
Remark 1 (The hedge-neutral measure). Our hedge-neutral measure P ∗is a particu-
lar risk-neutral measure, which is not unique in incomplete markets. A similar intuition for
P ∗with the same label is developed in Chapter 2 in the context of dynamic mean-variance
portfolio choice, where this measure is shown to absorb intertemporal hedging demands in
such a setting. The measure P ∗also turns out to coincide with the so-called “minimal mar-
tingale measure” solving min
Q E[−ln(dQ/dP)], where dQ/dP denotes the Radon-Nikodym
derivative of measure Q with respect to the original measure P. The minimal martingale
134


=== PDF PAGE 136 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
measure is argued to arise naturally in the diﬀerent context of “risk-minimizing hedging,”
introduced by Follmer and Sondermann (1986) and Follmer and Schweizer (1991). These
works deﬁne the cost of hedging as Ct = Wt −
R t
0 θτdSτ/Sτ and minimize the risk mea-
sure, Et[(CT −Ct)2], with respect to Wτ and θτ, for t ≤τ ≤T. In contrast to our work,
the resulting hedging policies do not satisfy the budget constraint and require additional
zero-mean inﬂows or outﬂows to it. As argued by Pham, Rheinlander and Schweizer (1998)
in the context of mean-variance hedging a more suitable measure is the “variance-optimal
measure” that solves min
Q E[(dQ/dP)2]. The reason is that in general the optimal policy
can be characterized in terms of the variance optimal measure, and only in terms of the
minimal martingale measure in the special cases where the two measures coincide under the
restrictive conditions of either
R T
0 (µs −r)/σsds being deterministic or the stock price, S,
not being aﬀected by the state variables.
3.2.3.
Applications
In this Section, we demonstrate that in contrast to the extant mean-variance hedging liter-
ature, our dynamically optimal minimum-variance hedges can easily be explicitly computed
in settings with stochastic means and volatilities. We here interpret the hedging instrument
as the stock of a ﬁrm that produces the commodity the hedger is committed to hold. It is
then plausible that the stock mean return is increasing in the commodity price and the stock
volatility decreasing, since the higher commodity price tends to increase the ﬁrm cash ﬂows
and decrease their risk. Towards this, we consider two examples, each accounting for one
of these eﬀects.40 In both examples, the non-tradable asset price follows a mean-reverting
process, which is consistent with the empirical evidence on oil and other commodity prices.
For example, Schwartz (1997) and Schwartz and Smith (2000) provide supporting evidence
for Gaussian mean-reverting logarithmic commodity prices, while Dixit and Pindyck (1994)
and Pindyck (2004) employ a geometric Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process to model and estimate
40A more realistic model would combine the two eﬀects and may include dependence on the state variables
that aﬀect both tradable and non-tradable asset prices. In Section 3.4.2 we show that our model can easily
be extended to incorporate additional state variables.
135


=== PDF PAGE 137 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
oil price dynamics.
In our ﬁrst example, the non-tradable asset price follows a mean-reverting Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck (OU) process:41
dXt = λ( ¯X −Xt)dt + ¯νdwXt,
(226)
with λ > 0. The stock price has mean returns linear in price X and follows the dynamics
considered in Kim and Omberg (1996) in the context of dynamic portfolio choice:
dSt
St
= (r + σXt)dt + σdwt.
(227)
According to Proposition 3.1, ﬁnding the optimal hedging policy amounts to computing
the expected non-tradable payoﬀunder the hedge-neutral measure. Since under the hedge-
neutral measure the non-tradable asset price, X, also follows an OU process, its ﬁrst two
moments are straightforward to obtain (e.g., Vasicek, 1977).
Corollary 3.1 reports the
optimal hedging policy and its corresponding quality.
Corollary 3.1. The optimal hedging policy and the corresponding variance of the hedging
error for the mean-reverting Gaussian model (226)–(227) are given by
θ∗
t
=
ρ¯ν
σ e−(r+λ+ρ¯ν)(T−t),
(228)
vart[XT −W ∗
T ]
=
(1 −ρ2)¯ν2 1 −e−2(λ+ρ¯ν)(T−t)
2(λ + ρ¯ν)
.
(229)
The optimal hedge is a simple generalization of the complete-market perfect hedge, with
ρ¯ν replacing ¯ν in complete markets to account for the imperfect correlation between the
stock and non-tradable asset. This explicit solution also yields further insights that cannot
be analyzed in the general framework of Section 3.2.2. In particular, Corollary 3.1 reveals
that the sign of the hedge is given by that of the correlation parameter, ρ. When the non-
tradable asset and stock prices are positively correlated, only a long position in the stock
41The OU process allows considerable tractability at the cost of possibly negative prices. Alternatively, the
hedging strategies can explicitly be derived in a model with the stock mean return driven by a mean-reverting
logarithmic non-tradable asset price, as in Schwartz (1997) and Schwartz and Smith (2000). In this case all
prices would remain positive.
136


=== PDF PAGE 138 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
can reduce the hedging error variance, and vise versa for negative correlation. Moreover,
the absolute value of the hedge and the variance of the hedging error are decreasing in the
speed of mean-reversion parameter, λ. This is intuitive since a higher speed of convergence
to the mean leads to a lower variance of the non-tradable asset payoﬀ, and hence a smaller
hedge. The hedging quality also improves as the degree of market completeness, captured
by ρ2, increases. Moreover, the hedging quality is higher for a positive correlation than for
a negative one of the same magnitude since positively correlated stock better tracks the
non-tradable asset price.
The second example considers the case of the stock volatility being decreasing in the
non-tradable asset price, which follows a square-root mean-reverting process
dXt = λ( ¯X −Xt)dt + ¯ν
p
XtdwXt,
(230)
with λ > 0. The stock price follows the stochastic-volatility model employed by Chacko and
Viceira (2005) in the context of portfolio choice:
dSt
St
= µdt +
r
1
Xt
dwt.
(231)
As in the previous example, the explicit hedge follows easily from Proposition 3.1. Corollary
3.2 presents the optimal hedge along with the associated variance of the hedging error.
Corollary 3.2. The optimal hedging policy and the corresponding variance of the hedging
error for the mean-reverting stochastic-volatility model (230)–(231) are given by
θ∗
t
=
ρ¯νXte−(r+λ+ρ¯ν(µ−r))(T−t),
(232)
vart[XT −W ∗
T ]
=
(1 −ρ2)¯ν2 ¯X 1 −e−2(λ+ρ¯ν(µ−r))(T−t)
2(λ + ρ¯ν(µ −r))
+
(1 −ρ2)¯ν2(Xt −¯X)e−λ(T−t) −e−2(λ+ρ¯ν(µ−r))(T−t)
λ + 2ρ¯ν(µ −r)
.
(233)
Corollary 3.2 reveals that the absolute value of the hedge is increasing in the non-tradable
asset price. This is because a high asset price implies a low stock volatility. Hence, a higher
stock holding is required to hedge the non-tradable asset. The sign of the optimal hedge
137


=== PDF PAGE 139 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
equals that of the correlation ρ and its absolute value is decreasing in the mean-reversion
parameter λ. For the same reason as in the previous example, the hedging quality improves
with increased mean-reversion or degree of market completeness.
3.2.4.
Time-Consistency Conditions
We here discuss the time-inconsistency of the variance minimization criterion and establish
conditions on the economy, albeit restrictive, under which time-consistency obtains. First,
we observe that by the law of total variance
vart[XT −WT ] = Et[vart+τ(XT −WT )] + vart[Et+τ(XT −WT )],
τ > 0.
(234)
Sitting at time t, the hedger minimizes the sum of the expected future (t + τ)-variance
of hedging error and the variance of its future expectation, both of which may depend on
future strategies. When the hedger arrives at the future time t + τ, however, she minimizes
just the variance at that time, and regrets having taken into account the second term in
(234), the time-t variance of future expectation, since it vanishes at time t + τ, and hence
the time-inconsistency.
The time-inconsistency issue disappears in complete markets (ρ = ±1), where the non-
tradable asset can perfectly be replicated by dynamic trading, leading to zero hedging error
variance. However, it is still possible to have time-consistency of the variance criterion in an
incomplete-market economy under certain restrictions, as summarized in Proposition 3.2.
Proposition 3.2. Assume that the stock risk premium is zero, µt −r = 0.
Then the
variance criterion (219) is time-consistent and the ensuing optimal dynamic minimum-
variance hedging policy is given by
θ∗
t = ρνt
σt
Xt
∂Et[XT e−r(T−t)]
∂Xt
+ St
∂Et[XT e−r(T−t)]
∂St
.
(235)
In an economy with no compensation for risk taking and where the stock is traded only
for hedging purposes, the variance criterion becomes time-consistent. The reason is that
138


=== PDF PAGE 140 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
with zero stock risk premium, the (discounted) tradable wealth reduces to a martingale
and so the hedging costs (second term in (225)) disappear. Consequently, the non-tradable
asset, and hence time-t hedge, are not aﬀected by future policies, eliminating the time-
inconsistency.42 Moreover, we see that the structure of the optimal hedge is as in complete
and incomplete markets, but now the original measure acts as the valuating expectation.
This optimal hedge generates those obtained by Duﬃe and Jackson (1990), who consider
among other problems, minimum-variance hedging with futures contracts which turns out
to be time-consistent. As in Proposition 3.2, it can be shown for their economic setting with
martingale futures prices and interest accruing on a futures margin account that the variance
criterion is time-consistent and the optimal hedge is given by (235), which generalizes their
explicit hedges derived for martingale and geometric Brownian motion non-tradable asset
prices.
Proposition 3.2 also allows us to convert the minimum-variance hedging problem con-
sidered in Section 3.2.2 to a time-consistent one, as discussed in Corollary 3.3.
Corollary 3.3. In our incomplete-market economy consider the class of risk-neutral prob-
ability measures, P η, parameterized by η, on which are deﬁned two Brownian motions wη
X
and wη with correlation ρ such that the processes for the non-tradable asset, X, and stock
price, S, are given by
dXt
Xt
=

mt −ρνt
µt −r
σt
−
p
1 −ρ2ηt

dt + νtdwη
Xt,
dSt
St
= rdt + σtdwη
t ,
(236)
and the P η-measure is deﬁned by the Radon-Nikodym derivative
dP η
dP = e
−1
2
R T
0

( µs−r
σs
)2+η2
s

ds−
R T
0
µs−r
σs
dws−
R T
0 ηsdw⊥
s ,
(237)
where w⊥is a Brownian motion uncorrelated with w and deﬁned by dw⊥
t
≡(dwXt −
ρdwt)/
p
1 −ρ2.
The following minimum-variance criteria
varη
t [XT −WT ],
(238)
42Formally, the ﬁrst term in the law of total variance (234) depends only on future policies, while the
second term depends only on the time-t policy, θt. As a result, the minimization of time-t variance does not
lead to any inconsistency.
139


=== PDF PAGE 141 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
where the variance is taken under a risk-neutral measure P η, are time-consistent with the
optimal hedge given by
θη
t = ρνt
σt
Xt
∂Eη
t [XT e−r(T−t)]
∂Xt
+ St
∂Eη
t [XT e−r(T−t)]
∂St
,
(239)
where Eη
t [·] denotes the expectation under P η. For η = 0, a risk-neutral measure is hedge-
neutral and the optimal hedge (239) equals the dynamically optimal hedge (220).
Corollary 3.3 reveals that a risk-neutral measure adjusts the variance criterion so that it
becomes time-consistent. The criterion (238) treats the non-tradable asset and stock price
processes as if they were under a risk-neutral measure. Under this measure the stock has
mean return equal to the riskless rate r, and hence zero risk premium, which implies time-
consistency by Proposition 3.2. The dynamically optimal hedge (220) is then obtained from
the time-consistent hedging problem when ηt = 0.
3.3.
Comparison with Pre-commitment, Static and Myopic Hedges
In this Section, we compare our dynamically optimal hedging policy with popular minimum-
variance hedging policies employed in the ﬁnance literature and practice. First, we consider
the policy that minimizes the hedging error variance at an initial date. Second, we look at
the classic static hedge that minimizes the hedging error variance at an initial date and does
not allow subsequent portfolio rebalancing. Finally, we study the popular myopic hedge that
in each period hedges the changes in the non-tradable asset price over the next period.
To assess the relative performance of any given two policies, we compare their hedging
error variances. Since the conditional variances in general are stochastic, for tractability we
consider a relative performance measure that computes the percentage increase or decrease
in the unconditional expected variance when the hedger switches from the dynamically
optimal to an alternative hedging policy:
∆t = E0[vart(XT −W alternative
T
)]
E0[vart(XT −W ∗
T )]
−1,
(240)
where W alternative
T
denotes the terminal tradable wealth under the alternative policy, θalternative
t
,
140


=== PDF PAGE 142 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
considered in Sections 3.3.1–3.3.3.43 A positive relative performance measure implies that
the quality of the dynamically optimal hedge is on average higher than that of the alter-
native hedge, in which case we say that the dynamically optimal hedge outperforms the
alternative one.
3.3.1.
Comparison with Pre-commitment Policy
We here investigate the performance of the dynamically optimal hedging policy as compared
with that of the policy that minimizes the hedging error variance at an initial date 0, as
considered in the literature (e.g., Duﬃe and Richardson, 1991; Schweizer, 1994; Musiela and
Rutkowski, 1998). As discussed in Section 3.2, the variance-minimizing hedger may ﬁnd it
optimal to deviate from the latter policy at future dates unless she can pre-commit to follow
it, and henceforth we refer to it as the pre-commitment policy.
To our best knowledge, Duﬃe and Richardson are the only ones to provide an explicit
expression for this policy in the context of hedging with futures contacts and interest ac-
cruing on a futures margin account when the futures and non-tradable asset prices follow
GBMs. Therefore, we compare the two policies for the case of the non-tradable asset and
stock prices following GBMs:
dXt
Xt
=
mdt + νdwXt,
(241)
dSt
St
=
µdt + σdwt,
(242)
where m, ν, µ and σ are constants.
The dynamically optimal hedge is obtained from
Proposition 3.1, while the pre-commitment hedge along the lines of Duﬃe and Richardson
(1991) adapted to our setup. Proposition 3.3 presents the two policies and a simple condition
for the dynamically optimal hedge to outperform.44
Proposition 3.3. The dynamically optimal and pre-commitment policies for GBM non-
43All our relative performance results in Sections 3.3.2–3.3.3 (Propositions 3.4–3.5) remain valid for a more
general, conditional relative performance measure given by vart[XT −W alternative
T
]/ vart[XT −W ∗
T ] −1.
44Proposition 3.3 does not report the variances of hedging errors under the two policies since this Section
focuses on relative rather than individual performances. These variances, however, can be deduced in the
proof of Proposition 3.3 in the Appendix.
141


=== PDF PAGE 143 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
tradable asset and stock prices (241)–(242) are given by
θ∗
t
=
ρν
σ Xte(m−r−ρν(µ−r)/σ)(T−t),
(243)
θcommit
t
=
ρν
σ Xte(m−r−ρν(µ−r)/σ)(T−t)
(244)
−
µ −r
σ2

(X0e(m−r−ρν(µ−r)/σ)T −W0)ert −(Xte(m−r−ρν(µ−r)/σ)(T−t) −W commit
t
)

.
Furthermore, ∃¯t < T such that the relative performance ∆t > 0 for t > ¯t, i.e., the dynami-
cally optimal hedge outperforms the pre-commitment hedge after a period of time.
Proposition 3.3 reveals that the dynamically optimal and pre-commitment hedges are
generically diﬀerent.
While the dynamically optimal hedge is a simple generalization of
the complete-market hedge (with ρ substituted in), the pre-commitment hedge inherits an
additional stochastic term (second term in (244)). To see why this term arises, we observe
that if the hedger follows the dynamically optimal policy from time t on, her expected
hedging error is (as shown in the Appendix)
Et[(XT −W ∗
T )e−r(T−t)] = Xte(m−r−ρν(µ−r)/σ)(T−t) −Wt.
(245)
Hence, the second term in (244) hedges the deviations of the expected discounted hedging
error, Et[(XT −W ∗
T )e−r(T−t)], from its time-zero value (compounded by a term reﬂecting
accrued interest in [0, t]). The hedger tries to keep this deviation close to zero because a high
variability in the expected hedging error implies a high time-zero hedging error variance
(from the law of total variance (234)).
So, when the second term in (244) is positive,
the hedger reduces her stock holding, and hence her anticipated tradable wealth, thereby
increasing the future expected hedging error making it closer to time-zero hedging error; and
vise versa when the second term is negative. The structure of the pre-commitment policy
highlights the time-inconsistency of the problem. It shows that sitting at time t, the hedger
still behaves so as to maintain a low time-zero rather than time-t hedging error variance.
Proposition 3.3 also reveals that the dynamically optimal hedge always outperforms
the pre-commitment one after a certain period of time. Since the pre-commitment hedge
minimizes the time-zero hedging error variance, it performs better for small time periods
142


=== PDF PAGE 144 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
−15
−10
−5 
0  
+5  
+10 
+15 
+20 
+25 
t
∆t%
(µ−r)/σ=0.15
(µ−r)/σ=0.3
(µ−r)/σ=0.45
(µ−r)/σ=0.6
Figure 3.1: Relative Performance of Dynamically Optimal and
Pre-commitment Hedges.
The ﬁgure plots the relative performance measure ∆t (equation (240)) as a function of time for vary-
ing levels of market price of risk. The dynamically optimal policy outperforms the pre-commitment
one whenever ∆t > 0. Correlation and horizon parameters are assumed to be ρ = 0.5 and T = 1.
The volatility parameter ν = 0.36 is taken from the estimate in Schwartz (1997), based on weekly oil
futures price data in January 1990–1995, while market price of risk range of [0.15, 0.6] is consistent
with the estimates in Mehra and Prescott (1985), Cogley and Sargent (2008), and others.
t. However, at later dates, the dynamically optimal hedge performs better since the time-
inconsistency makes the pre-commitment hedge suboptimal.
In the case when the non-
tradable asset and stock prices follow GBMs, the relative performance measure, ∆t, can
explicitly be computed (as reported in the proof of Proposition 3.3). Conveniently, this
measure depends only on the correlation parameter ρ, non-tradable asset volatility ν, market
price of risk (µ−r)/σ, and the hedging horizon T −t. Since the relative performance measure
turns out to not be sensitive to ρ and ν, we focus below on its behavior with respect to T −t
and (µ −r)/σ.
We consider a speciﬁc example in which the non-tradable asset is oil and the stock repre-
sents the stock of an oil producing company. The GBM model for oil prices is a special case
of those in Gibson and Schwartz (1990) and Schwartz (1997) when the convenience yield
is assumed constant rather than mean-reverting. Figure 3.1 plots the relative performance
measure ∆t over time for diﬀerent market prices of risk. It demonstrates that for plausible
143


=== PDF PAGE 145 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
parameters and one-year hedging horizon, the dynamically optimal policy starts outperform-
ing the pre-commitment policy from mid-year on. Moreover, for lower market price of risk,
the relative performance measure gets closer to zero, reﬂecting the fact that the diﬀerence
between the two policies is reduced (as observed from the expressions (243)–(244)).
3.3.2.
Comparison with Static Policy
We now examine the classic static hedging problem in ﬁnance where an initial hedge, chosen
to minimize the hedging error variance, is not readjusted throughout the hedging period.
Due to its tractability and intuitive appeal, the static minimum-variance hedge is widely
used by both practitioners and academics. The classic theory of the static hedge and its
real-life applications are presented in all the prominent textbooks in derivatives and risk-
management (e.g., Duﬃe, 1989; Siegel and Siegel, 1990; Stultz, 2003; Cvitanic and Zapatero,
2004; McDonald, 2006; Hull, 2008), as well as being employed in empirical works (e.g.,
Ederington, 1979; Rolfo, 1980; Figlewski, 1984; Kamara and Siegel, 1987; Kerkvliet and
Moﬀett, 1991;In and Kim, 2006). As discussed in Section 3.4.1, a generalization of the static
hedge to static mean-variance hedge (incorporating additionally the mean in the hedging
criterion) is also widely employed in the literature.
A static hedger minimizes the variance of the hedging error at the initial date 0, subject
to the static budget constraint
WT = W0erT + θ0(ST /S0 −erT ),
(246)
and holds the initially chosen hedge, θstatic
0
/S0, in units of stock, throughout the hedging
horizon. The solution to this problem is easily obtained and the time-t static hedge is given
by45
θstatic
t
= cov0(ST /St, XT )
var0[ST /St]
.
(247)
The static hedge is simply driven by the comovement of the stock return and the non-
tradable asset payoﬀover the remaining hedging period. The hedge is positive when the
45Since the hedger holds the same number of units of stock over the horizon, θstatic
t
= (θstatic
0
/S0)St.
144


=== PDF PAGE 146 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
stock is positively correlated with the asset payoﬀsince then the stock better tracks the asset
payoﬀover the period. We observe that our optimal dynamic hedge (220) can equivalently
be rewritten as
θ∗
t = covt(dSt/St, dE∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)])
σ2
t
.
(248)
Clearly, the dynamic hedge inherits the basic intuitive structure of the static hedge, but now
tracking comovement between the instantaneous stock return and the change in the hedge-
neutral asset payoﬀvalue, and so capturing the arrival of new information. The dynamic
hedge is positive for positive correlation between the stock and hedge-neutral value since
then the stock trading better replicates the non-tradable payoﬀ.
One important diﬀerence between the static and dynamically optimal hedges is that
the static hedge in general does not provide a perfect hedge, even in dynamically complete
markets when ρ2 = 1 (with one notable exception as discussed below), in contrast to the
dynamic one. This is because the static hedge cannot adjust to the arrival of new information
as it does not rebalance the initially chosen policy. Consequently, the dynamic hedge always
outperforms the static one when the market is close to being complete. We next compare
the two hedges and their performances under popular price dynamics for which the relative
performance measure ∆t (expression (240)) can explicitly be computed.
In addition to
considering the non-tradable and stock prices following GBMs (241)–(242), we also study
the cases of their following ABMs
dXt
=
¯mdt + ¯νdwXt,
(249)
dSt
=
¯µdt + ¯σdwt,
(250)
with ¯m, ¯ν, ¯µ, ¯σ constants, as well as the non-tradable asset following an OU process
dXt = λ( ¯X −Xt)dt + ¯νdwXt,
(251)
with ¯X and λ > 0 constants. Proposition 3.4 reports the results.
Proposition 3.4. The dynamically optimal and static hedges and their relative performances
under various non-tradable asset and stock price processes are as given in Table 3.1.
145


=== PDF PAGE 147 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Table 3.1
Optimal Dynamic and Static Hedges and Their Relative Performances
The table reports the dynamically optimal and static hedges and the sign of their relative performance
measure ∆t (equation (240)) when non-tradable asset and stock prices follow various stochastic
processes.
We say that the dynamically optimal hedge outperforms the static one when ∆t is
positive, and underperforms when ∆t is negative. ABM, GBM and OU denote arithmetic Brownian
motion (equations (249)–(250)), geometric Brownian motion (equations (241)–(242)) and Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck mean-reverting (equation (251)) processes, respectively. In all cases, we assume ρ̸ = 0,
since otherwise the stock cannot hedge the non-traded asset and all the hedges are trivially zero.
Optimal Hedges
Performance
Processes
dynamic θ∗
t
static θstatic
t
sign ∆t
asset X
stock S
ρνSt
σ
ρνSt
σ
0
ABM
ABM
ρνXt
σ
e(m−r−ρν µ−r
σ
)(T −t)
X0St
S0
eρνσT −1
eσ2T −1 e(m−µ)T
 +
ρ > 0
+/−
ρ < 0
GBM
GBM
ρνSt
σ
λe−λ(T −t)+rer(T −t)
λ+r
ρνSt
σ
1−e−λT
λT
+
OU
ABM
ρν
σ e−(λ+r)(T −t)
ρνσSt
λS0
1−e−λT
eσ2T −1 e−µT
+
OU
GBM
The dynamically optimal and static hedges coincide in the special case of the non-
tradable asset and stock prices both following ABMs. This is because, with random walk
prices, the non-tradable asset and stock price variances and covariances are deterministic
and hence the new information released over time does not help predict them better than
the information available at the initial date, and therefore the hedging problem is eﬀectively
static by its nature. The two policies are considerably diﬀerent, however, in the other settings
where the dynamic hedge typically outperforms the static one. In particular, when the non-
tradable asset and stock prices follow GBMs, the dynamically optimal policy outperforms
the static one when the correlation parameter ρ is positive. With a positive asset-stock
correlation, the stock process better imitates the ﬂuctuations in the non-tradable asset price,
which improves the quality of hedging. When the correlation is negative, the dynamically
optimal hedge always outperforms after a certain period of time (as demonstrated in the
Appendix) but may underperform in the beginning if the stock market price of risk is
implausibly high. Finally, when the non-tradable asset price follows an OU process, the
dynamic hedge always outperforms. With the predictability in the non-tradable asset price
146


=== PDF PAGE 148 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
present, the dynamic hedge better accounts for the arrival of new information over time,
and hence performs better.
3.3.3.
Comparison with Myopic Policy
Finally, we compare the dynamically optimal and myopic hedges. At each point in time,
a myopic hedger hedges the instantaneous changes in the non-tradable asset price via the
instantaneous changes in tradable wealth. Hence, the myopic hedge can be viewed as the
static hedge over an inﬁnitesimally small hedging horizon, repeated over time. The myopic
hedge retains the tractability of the static hedge which makes it appealing for practitioners
and academics (e.g., Kroner and Sultan, 1993; Lioui and Poncet, 2000; Brooks, Henry and
Persand, 2002).
The myopic hedger at each point of time minimizes the variance of the hedging error
over the next instant
min
θt
vart[dXt −dWt],
(252)
subject to the budget constraint (218). The variance of this instantaneous hedging error
can explicitly be computed to be given by a quadratic function of a hedging policy. The
minimization of this variance leads to the following explicit expression for the optimal myopic
policy:
θ
myopic
t
= ρνt
σt
Xt.
(253)
The myopic hedge is simply the instantaneous version of the static hedge and is in general
diﬀerent from the dynamically optimal hedge (220). In particular, the myopic hedge ignores
the potential impact of mean-returns on the hedging error variance since the ﬁrst term in
the asset dynamics (216) is conditionally riskless over next instant. As a result, the myopic
policy in general does not provide a perfect hedge even in dynamically complete markets,
just like the static one. Consequently, it underperforms the dynamically optimal hedge when
the market is close to being complete. As in the previous Section, we compare the myopic
and dynamically optimal hedges for popular price processes, including GBMs (241)–(242),
147


=== PDF PAGE 149 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Table 3.2
Dynamically Optimal and Myopic Policies and Their Relative Performances
The table reports the dynamically optimal and myopic hedges and the sign of their relative perfor-
mance measure ∆t (equation (240)) when non-tradable asset and stock prices follow various stochas-
tic processes. We say that the dynamically optimal hedge outperforms the myopic one when ∆t is
positive, and underperforms when ∆t is negative. ABM, GBM and OU denote arithmetic Brownian
motion (equations (249)–(250)), geometric Brownian motion (equations (241)–(242)) and Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck mean-reverting (equation (251)) processes, respectively. In all cases, we assume ρ̸ = 0,
since otherwise the stock cannot hedge the non-traded asset and all the hedges are trivially zero.
Optimal Hedges
Performance
Processes
dynamic θ∗
t
myopic θ
myopic
t
sign ∆t
asset X
stock S
ρνSt
σ
ρνSt
σ
0
ABM
ABM
ρνXt
σ
e(m−r−ρν µ−r
σ
)(T −t)
ρνXt
σ













0
m −r
ν
= ρ µ −r
σ
+
ρ > 0,
m −r
ν
> ρ µ −r
σ
+/−
ρ < 0 or m −r
ν
< ρ µ −r
σ
GBM
GBM
ρνSt
σ
λe−λ(T −t)+rer(T −t)
λ+r
ρνSt
σ
+
OU
ABM
ρν
σ e−(λ+r)(T −t)
ρν
σ
+
OU
GBM
ABMs (249)–(250), and OU (251).
Proposition 3.5 reports the two hedges under these
settings, as well as their relative performances.
Proposition 3.5. The dynamically optimal and myopic hedges and their relative perfor-
mances under various non-tradable asset and stock price processes are as given in Table 3.2.
The myopic and dynamically optimal hedges coincide under the random walk environ-
ment of ABM since the hedging problem is eﬀectively static by its nature, as discussed in
Section 3.3.2. In the other environments, the two hedges generically diﬀer, with the dy-
namically optimal hedge typically outperforming the myopic hedge. With predictable OU
non-tradable asset prices, the dynamically optimal policy better incorporates the arrival of
new information and hence outperforms the myopic one, as in static case of Section 3.3.2.
When the asset and stock both follow GBMs, the two hedges coincide in the very special
case of the non-tradable asset market price of risk equalling that of the stock (adjusted by
148


=== PDF PAGE 150 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
correlation ρ). The reason is that in this case the tradable wealth better tracks the non-
tradable asset price since the myopic hedge not only minimizes the instantaneous hedging
error variance but also matches the risk premia on the non-tradable asset and tradable
wealth.46
The dynamically optimal hedge, however, outperforms for positive asset-stock
correlation and relatively high asset market price of risk, and otherwise can outperform or
underperform. As an example, consider the case of hedging gas prices that follow GBM
with parameters m = 0.836 and ν = 0.59 (approximated from OU gas log-prices estimated
in Jalliet, Ronn and Tompaidis (2004)). In this case, the dynamically optimal policy out-
performs the myopic one for positive correlation and plausible stock market prices of risk of
[0.15, 0.6].
3.4.
Extensions
We now generalize the results on minimum-variance hedging derived in Section 3.2 along
two dimensions. First, we consider a more general model in which the hedger is guided
by a linear mean-variance criterion over the hedging error. Second, we demonstrate that
the minimum-variance hedging model can easily be extended to a richer environment with
multiple non-tradable assets and stocks.
3.4.1.
Mean-Variance Hedging and Benchmark Tracking
We here consider a hedger who also accounts for the mean hedging error, and trades it oﬀ
against the hedging error variance. Such a mean-variance hedging criterion is commonly
employed in a variety of, primarily static, settings (e.g., Anderson and Danthine, 1980, 1981,
1983; Hirshleifer, 1988; Duﬃe, 1989; Duﬃe and Jackson, 1989). Our analysis in this Section
is also related to the literature on portfolio management with benchmarking. In this liter-
ature, money managers are evaluated relative to a benchmark portfolio and are concerned
about their tracking error, deﬁned as the deviation of a manager’s performance from that of
the benchmark. The mean-variance tracking error model amounts to mean-variance hedging
46More generally, it can be shown that the dynamically optimal and myopic hedges coincide whenever
(mt −r)/νt = ρ(µt −r)/σt. The intuition is the same as in the case of GBM asset and stock prices.
149


=== PDF PAGE 151 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
if we relabel the non-tradable asset X as the benchmark portfolio and observe that tracking
error is the negative of hedging error. Roll (1992), Jorion (2003), Gomez and Zapatero
(2003), Cornell and Roll (2005) discuss the implications of such benchmarking on portfolio
eﬃciency and asset pricing. Chan, Karceski and Lakonishok (1999) and Costa and Paiva
(2002) discuss the implications of estimation risk and robust portfolio selection with bench-
marking. These works all employ a static mean-variance framework by either minimizing
the tracking error variance for a given mean, or maximizing the tracking error mean for a
given variance.
A dynamic mean-variance hedger chooses an optimal hedge, trading-oﬀlower variance
against higher mean of hedging error, by solving the dynamic problem
max
θt
Et[XT −WT ] −γ
2vart[XT −WT ],
(254)
subject to the budget constraint (218), where the parameter γ captures the hedger’s attitudes
towards risk. The optimal quality of the hedge is measured by the value function Jt, given
by the criterion in (254) evaluated at the optimal policy. As in Section 3.2 we consider the
time-consistent solution to problem (254) obtained by dynamic programming. Proposition
3.6 reports the dynamically optimal hedging policy along with the value function.
Proposition 3.6. The dynamically optimal mean-variance hedge, θ∗
t , and the corresponding
value function, Jt, are given by
θ∗
t
=
ρνt
σt
Xt
∂E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)]
∂Xt
+ St
∂E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)]
∂St
−µt −r
γσ2
t
e−r(T−t)
(255)
+
ρνt
σt
Xt
∂E∗
t
hR T
t
1
γ

µs−r
σs
2
ds

e−r(T−t)i
∂Xt
+ St
∂E∗
t
hR T
t
1
γ

µs−r
σs
2
ds

e−r(T−t)i
∂St
,
Jt
=
−γ
2(1 −ρ2)Et
hZ T
t
ν2
sX2
s
∂E∗
s[XT +
R T
s
1
γ

µτ−r
στ
2
dτ
i
∂Xs
2
ds
i
(256)
+
E∗
t
h
XT e−r(T−t)i
−Wter(T−t) + 1
2E∗
t
hZ T
t
1
γ
µs −r
σs
2
ds
i
.
Proposition 3.6 reveals that the dynamically optimal mean-variance hedge is comprised
of three types of terms.
The ﬁrst two terms in (255) comprise the variance-minimizing
150


=== PDF PAGE 152 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
hedge of Section 3.2, reﬂecting the hedger’s aversion towards hedging error variance. The
third term is the speculative demand, as referred to in the related works (e.g., Anderson
and Danthine, 1980, 1981; Duﬃe, 1989), and arises due to the hedger’s desire for high mean
hedging error. Finally, the last two terms in (255) are the intertemporal hedging demands,
familiar in the portfolio choice literature. These demands arise due to the ﬂuctuations in
the non-tradable asset and stock mean returns and volatilities, and in our framework are
simply given by the sensitivities of the hedge-neutral value of anticipated speculative gains.
The optimal hedge (255) can explicitly be computed for speciﬁc stochastic environments,
as in the case of the minimum-variance hedge. However, in this case, the computations are
more involved, and the hedge depends on the hedger-speciﬁc parameter γ. Moreover, in
contrast to the minimum-variance hedge, the dynamically optimal mean-variance hedge, in
general, diﬀers from its associated pre-commitment one even in complete markets. Fur-
thermore, even though the hedging problem can be reduced to one with a time-consistent
criterion under some conditions as in Section 3.2.4, the solution from such a criterion does
not, in general, coincide with the actual one (255), unlike in the minimum-variance case.
The value function (256) that measures the quality of the optimal hedge implies a better
hedge with a higher value. However, it can be veriﬁed that unlike the minimum-variance
hedge, the optimal mean-variance hedge does not provide a perfect hedge (i.e., having zero
hedging error variance) even in complete markets because the hedger forgoes lower hedging
error variance for higher mean.
3.4.2.
Multi-dimensional case
We now demonstrate that the results of Section 3.2 can be extended to the case with
multiple non-tradable assets and stocks.
We consider an economy in which uncertainty
is generated by two multi-dimensional Brownian motions wX = (wX1, ..., wXN)⊤and w =
(w1, ..., wK)⊤.
By ρ we denote the N × K correlation matrix with elements ρ = {ρnk}
representing correlations between the Brownian motions wXn and wk.
151


=== PDF PAGE 153 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
There are N non-tradable assets whose prices, X = (X1, ..., XN)⊤, follow dynamics
dXit
Xit
= mi(Xt, t)dt + νi(Xt, t)⊤dwXt,
i = 1, ..., N,
(257)
where mi and νi are deterministic functions of X. We let m = (m1, ..., mN)⊤and ν =
(ν1, ..., νN)⊤denote the vector of mean returns and the volatility matrix whose elements ν =
{νni} represent covariances between the non-tradable asset returns and Brownian motion
wX. At future date T, the hedger is committed to hold a portfolio of non-tradable assets
with payoﬀφ⊤XT , where φ = (φ1, ..., φN)⊤denotes the vector of units held in assets. An
asset that is not held by the hedger (φi = 0) may still aﬀect the dynamics of the assets held
and can be relabeled to be a state variable, such as economic conditions, temperature or
precipitation level.
The risk associated with the portfolio of non-tradable assets can be hedged by trading
in a riskless bond with constant interest rate r and K tradable securities with prices S =
(S1, ..., SK)⊤that follow the dynamics
dSjt
Sjt
= µj(St, Xt, t)dt + σj(St, Xt, t)⊤dwt,
j = 1, ..., K,
(258)
where µi and σi are deterministic functions of S and we let µ = (µ1, ..., µK)⊤and σ =
(σ1, ..., σK)⊤denote the vector of mean returns and the volatility matrix of stock returns,
assumed invertible, respectively. The hedger chooses a hedging policy, θ = (θ1, ..., θK), where
θt denotes the vector of dollar amounts invested in stocks at time t. The tradable wealth
W then follows the process
dWt = [rWt + θ⊤
t (µt −r)]dt + θ⊤
t σtdwt.
(259)
The hedger’s dynamic optimization problem is as in Section 3.2. At each time t, she mini-
mizes the variance of her hedging error, φ⊤XT −WT , subject to the budget constraint (259).
The optimal policy is then derived by dynamic programming as in Section 3.2. Proposition
3.7 reports the dynamically optimal hedge and its associated quality.
Proposition 3.7. The optimal hedging policy and the corresponding variance of hedging
152


=== PDF PAGE 154 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
error are given by
θ∗
t
=
(νtρ⊤σ−1
t )⊤IXt
∂E∗
t [φ⊤XT e−r(T−t)]
∂X⊤
t
+ ISt
∂E∗
t [φ⊤XT e−r(T−t)]
∂S⊤
t
,
(260)
vart[φ⊤XT −W ∗
T ]
=
Et
hZ T
t
∂E∗
s[φ⊤XT ]
∂Xs
νsIXs(I −ρ⊤ρ)IXsν⊤
s
∂E∗
s[φ⊤XT ]
∂X⊤
s
ds
i
,
(261)
where IXt and ISt are square matrices with the main diagonals X1t, ..., XNt and S1t, ..., SKt,
respectively, I a K × K identity matrix, and E∗
t [·] denotes the expectation under the unique
hedge-neutral measure P ∗on which are deﬁned N-dimensional Brownian motion w∗
X and
K-dimensional Brownian motion w∗with correlation ρ such that the process for the non-
tradable assets, X, and stock prices, S, are given by
dXit
Xit
=
 mit −ν⊤
it ρ⊤σ−1
t (µt −r)

dt + ν⊤
it dw∗
Xt,
i = 1, ..., N,
dSjt
Sjt
=
rdt + σ⊤
jtdw∗
t ,
j = 1, ..., K,
and the P ∗-measure is deﬁned by the Radon-Nikodym derivative
dP ∗
dP = e−1
2
R T
0 (µs−r)⊤(σsσ⊤
s )−1(µs−r)ds−
R T
0 (σ−1
s
(µs−r))
⊤dws.
The dynamically optimal hedge (260) has the same structure as in the case of the sin-
gle non-tradable asset and stock, but now additionally incorporates the eﬀects of cross-
correlations. This hedge can explicitly be computed for various stochastic investment op-
portunities, leading to a rich set of comparative statics. The expression (261) for the optimal
hedging error variance reveals that the dynamically optimal hedge provides a perfect hedge
when ρ⊤ρ = I, which generalizes the market completeness condition of Section 3.2.
3.5.
Conclusion
This work tackles the problem of dynamic hedging in incomplete markets and provides
tractable optimal hedges according to the traditional minimum-variance criterion over the
hedging error. The optimal hedges are shown to retain both the simple structure of complete-
market hedges and the intuitive features of static hedges, and are in terms of the familiar
153


=== PDF PAGE 155 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Greeks, widely employed in risk management applications. Moreover, in contrast to the
existing literature, the hedges are derived via dynamic programming and hence are time-
consistent. The dynamically optimal hedges are shown to outperform the static and myopic
ones in plausible stochastic environments, coinciding with them only in the simple case of
both risky assets following ABMs. They also outperform the pre-commitment hedges after a
period of time, as demonstrated in the case of assets following GBMs. Due to its tractability,
the baseline analysis can easily be extended in various directions, as shown in the paper.
154


=== PDF PAGE 156 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
3.6.
Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 3.1.
We obtain the optimal hedge (220) by following the method-
ology in Chapter 2 and applying dynamic programming to the value function Jt, deﬁned
as
J(Xt, St, Wt, t) ≡vart[XT −W ∗
T ].
(262)
Suppose, the hedger rebalances the portfolio over time intervals τ. The law of total variance
(234) substituted into (262) yields a recursive representation for the value function:
Jt = min
θt Et[Jt+τ] + vart[Et+τ(XT −WT )].
(263)
We next substitute WT in (263) by its integral form
WT = Wter(T−t) +
Z T
t
θs(µs −r)er(T−s)ds +
Z T
t
θsσser(T−s)dws,
(264)
obtained from the budget constraint (218), and take into account that optimal hedges θ∗
s,
s ∈[t+τ, T], are already known at time-t from backward induction. Letting the time interval
τ shrink to zero and manipulating (263), we obtain the continuous-time HJB equation
0 = min
θt Et[dJt] + vart[dGt −d(Wter(T−t))],
(265)
with the terminal condition JT = 0, where Gt is deﬁned by
G(Xt, St, Wt, t) ≡Et[XT −
Z T
t
θ∗
s(µs −r)er(T−s)ds].
(266)
We note that θ∗
t , Jt and Gt do not depend on wealth Wt. To verify this, we substitute WT
in (264) into the variance criterion and observe that the variance criterion is not aﬀected by
Wt, and hence θ∗
t , Jt and Gt depend only on Xt, St and t. Applying Itˆo’s lemma to Jt, Gt
and Wter(T−t), substituting them into (265) and computing the variance term, we obtain
the equation
0 = DJt
+
ν2
t X2
t
∂Gt
∂Xt
2
+ 2ρνtσtXtSt
∂Gt
∂Xt
∂Gt
∂St
+ σ2
t S2
t
∂Gt
∂St
2
+
min
θt
h
θ2
t σ2
t e2r(T−t) −2θtσt

ρνtXt
∂Gt
∂Xt
+ σtSt
∂Gt
∂St

er(T−t)i
,
(267)
155


=== PDF PAGE 157 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
subject to JT = 0. The minimization in (267) has a unique solution
θ∗
t = ρνt
σt
Xt
∂Gt
∂Xt
e−r(T−t) + St
∂Gt
∂St
e−r(T−t).
(268)
Substituting (268) back into (267), we obtain the following PDE for the value function
DJt + (1 −ρ2)

νtXt
∂Gt
∂Xt
2
= 0,
(269)
with the terminal condition JT = 0. The Feynman-Kac solution (Karatzas and Shreve,
1991) to equation (269) is then given by
Jt = (1 −ρ2)Et
hZ T
t

νsXs
∂Gs
∂Xs
2
ds
i
.
(270)
To complete the proof it remains to determine the process Gt in terms of the exogenous
model parameters. By applying the Feynman-Kac theorem to (266), we obtain a PDE for
Gt. Substituting θ∗
t from (268) into this PDE, we obtain the equation
∂Gt
∂t +

mt−ρνt
µt −r
σt

Xt
∂Gt
∂Xt
+rSt
∂Gt
∂St
+1
2

ν2
t X2
t
∂2Gt
∂X2
t
+2ρνtσtXtSt
∂2Gt
∂Xt∂St
+σ2
t S2
t
∂2Gt
∂S2
t

= 0,
with the terminal condition GT = XT . Its Feynman-Kac solution is then given by
Gt = E∗
t [XT ],
(271)
where the expectation is under the unique probability measure P ∗on which are deﬁned two
Brownian motions w∗
X and w∗such that under P ∗the asset X and stock S follow the pro-
cesses given in (222). Substituting (271) into (268) and (270) yields the optimal hedge (220)
and the hedging error variance (221), respectively. To ﬁnd the Radon-Nikodym derivative
dP ∗/dP, we decompose the Brownian motion wX as dwXt = ρdwt +
p
(1 −ρ2)dw⊥
t , where
w⊥
t
≡(wXt −ρwt)/
p
(1 −ρ2) is a Brownian motion uncorrelated with wt. Applying the
Girsanov’s theorem (Karatzas and Shreve, 1991) to the two-dimensional Brownian motion
(wt, w⊥
t )⊤yields the Radon-Nikodym derivative (223).
Finally, we derive the representation (225) for E∗
t [XT e−r(T−t)] by ﬁrst taking the expec-
tation of (264)
Et
h
W ∗
T −Wter(T−t)i
= Et
hZ T
t
θ∗
s(µs −r)er(T−s)ds
i
,
(272)
and then substituting (271) and (272) into (266).
156


=== PDF PAGE 158 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Proof of Corollary 3.1.
Under the probability measure P ∗, the process (226) becomes
dXt = (λ + ρ¯ν)

λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯ν −Xt

dt + ¯νdw∗
Xt,
(273)
for which the conditional moments are well-known (e.g., Vasicek, 1977), yielding
E∗
t [XT ] =
λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯ν +

Xt −
λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯ν

e−(λ+ρ¯ν)(T−t).
Substituting this into the expressions in Proposition 3.1 yields the desired expressions (228)–
(229).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 3.2.
Under the probability measure P ∗, the process (230) follows
dynamics
dXt =

λ + ρ¯ν(µ −r)

λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯ν(µ −r) −Xt

dt + ¯ν
p
Xtdw∗
Xt.
(274)
The conditional expectation of XT is well-known (e.g., Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross, 1985) to
be
E∗
t [XT ] =
λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯ν(µ −r) +

Xt −
λ ¯X
λ + ρ¯ν(µ −r)

e−(λ+ρ¯ν(µ−r))(T−t).
Substituting this into the expressions in Proposition 3.1 yields (232)–(233).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3.2.
First, we derive a variation of the law of total variance.
From the law of total variance (234) with an inﬁnitesimally small interval τ, we obtain the
following equality in diﬀerential form:
0 = Et
h
d vars(XT −WT ) + vars(dEs[XT −WT ])
i
.
(275)
Integrating (275) from t to T yields
vart[XT −WT ] = Et
hZ T
t
vars(dEs[XT −WT ])
ds
ds
i
.
(276)
From the assumption µt −r = 0 and the integrated budget constraint (264), it follows
that Et[WT ] = Wter(T−t). Hence, by Itˆo’s lemma
dEt[XT −WT ] = (...)dt + νtXt
∂Et[XT ]
∂Xt
dwXt + σtSt
∂Et[XT ]
∂St
dwt −θtσter(T−t)dwt.
(277)
157


=== PDF PAGE 159 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Substituting (277) into (276) and computing vars(dEt[XT −WT ]), we obtain:
vart[XT −WT ] = Et
hZ T
t

θsσser(T−s)−ρνsXs
∂Es[XT ]
∂Xs
−σsSs
∂Es[XT ]
∂Ss
2
+(1−ρ2)
∂Es[XT ]
∂Xs
2
ds
i
.
(278)
Minimizing the expression under the integral in (278) gives the global minimum to the
variance criterion, yielding the hedge (235). Finally, we observe that for µt −r = 0, the
dynamically optimal hedge (220) coincides with the hedge (235) since the Radon-Nikodym
derivative (223) equals unity, and hence the the variance criterion is time-consistent.Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 3.3.
The hedging criterion (238) can be represented in integral form
(276) in which all the expectations and variances are under the measure P η (223).
By
deﬁnition of a risk-neutral measure P η, the stock mean return equals r, and hence Eη
t [WT ] =
Wter(T−t). Then, along the same lines as in the proof of Proposition 3.2, replacing at each
step Et[·] and vart[·] by Eη
t [·] and varη
t [·], respectively, it can be shown that the criterion
(238) is time-consistent and the solution is given by (220).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3.3.
We ﬁrst compute the optimal hedges and hedging error vari-
ances, and then derive the properties of the performance measure ∆t. From Proposition
3.1, under the measure P ∗the process X is a GBM with mean return (m −ρν(µ −r)/σ)
and volatility ν, which then yields
E∗
t [XT ] = Xte(m−ρν(µ−r)/σ)(T−t).
(279)
Substituting (279) into Proposition 3.1, we obtain the dynamically optimal hedge (243) and
the associated hedging error variance
vart[XT −W ∗
T ] = (1 −ρ2)ν2X2
t e2(m−ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t) e(ν2+2ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t) −1
ν2 + 2ρν µ−r
σ
.
(280)
The optimal pre-commitment hedge (244) for the case of r = 0 and W0 = 0 has been
obtained by Duﬃe and Richardson (1991) in the context of futures hedging.47 To obtain
47For the case of r > 0, Duﬃe and Richardson provide the optimal pre-commitment hedge assuming
interest accrues to a futures margin account, and so such a hedge will be diﬀerent from that in our economic
setting.
158


=== PDF PAGE 160 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
it for our case of r > 0 and W0 > 0, we observe that the budget constraint (218) can
equivalently be rewritten as
d ˜Wt = θt˜µtdt + θt˜σtdwt,
(281)
where ˜Wt = Wter(T−t) −W0erT , ˜µt = (µ −r)er(T−t), ˜σt = σer(T−t). The hedging problem
with the budget constraint (281) reduces to the case with r = 0 and ˜W0 = 0, and hence the
pre-commitment hedge (244) is easily obtained from the solution in Duﬃe and Richardson.
We next determine vart[XT −W commit
T
] by deriving the ﬁrst and second moments of an
auxiliary process Ht which coincides with the hedging error at t = T and is deﬁned as
Ht ≡Xte(m−r−ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t) −W commit
t
er(T−t).
(282)
Substituting the pre-commitment hedge (244) into the budget constraint (218) and applying
Itˆo’s lemma to Ht we obtain:
dHt =
µ −r
σ
2
(H0−Ht)dt+ µ −r
σ
(H0−Ht)dwt+
p
1 −ρ2νXte(m−ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t)dw⊥
t . (283)
Integrating (283) from t to τ and taking the time-t expectation on both sides yields a simple
linear integral equation for Et[Hτ], the unique solution to which is given by
Et[Hτ] = H0 + (Ht −H0)e−( µ−r
σ )2(τ−t).
To ﬁnd the second moment of Ht, we apply Itˆo’s lemma to (Ht −H0)2:
d(Ht−H0)2 = −
µ −r
σ
2
(Ht−H0)2−(1−ρ2)ν2X2
t e2(m−ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t)
dt+(...)dwt+(...)dw⊥
t .
Integrating both sides from t to τ and then taking the time-t expectation we obtain Et[(Hτ −
H0)2] as the solution to a linear integral equation given by
Et[(Hτ −H0)2]
=
(Ht −H0)2e−( µ−r
σ )2(τ−t)
+
(1 −ρ2)ν2X2
t e2(m−ρν µ−r
σ )(τ−t) e(ν2+2ρν µ−r
σ )(τ−t) −e−( µ−r
σ )2(τ−t)
ν2 + 2ρν µ−r
σ
+ (µ−r
σ )2
.
Given the ﬁrst two moments of Ht and taking into account that HT = XT −W commit
T
, we
obtain:
vart[XT −W commit
T
]
=
(Ht −H0)2e−( µ−r
σ )2(T−t)
1 −e−( µ−r
σ )2(T−t)
(284)
+
(1 −ρ2)ν2X2
t e2(m−ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t) e(ν2+2ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t) −e−( µ−r
σ )2(T−t)
ν2 + 2ρν µ−r
σ
+ (µ−r
σ )2
.
159


=== PDF PAGE 161 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Since the second moments of Xt and Ht are determined explicitly, it is straightforward
to explicitly compute E0[vart(XT −W ∗
T )] and E0[vart(XT −W commit
T
)]. The relative perfor-
mance measure (240) is then given by:
∆t
=
ν2 + 2ρν µ−r
σ
ν2 + 2ρν µ−r
σ
+ (µ−r
σ )2 e−( µ−r
σ )2(T−t)
 
e(ν2+2ρν µ−r
σ +( µ−r
σ )2)(T−t) −1
e(ν2+2ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t) −1
+
1 −e−(ν2+2ρν µ−r
σ +( µ−r
σ )2)t
e(ν2+2ρν µ−r
σ )(T−t) −1

1 −e−( µ−r
σ )2(T−t)!
−1.
(285)
Letting t go to T in (285), it is easy to show that ∆T > 0, and hence there exists a time ¯t
such that ∆t > 0 whenever t > ¯t.
Finally, we derive relation (245) by rearranging terms in (225) and substituting (279).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3.4.
First, we consider the case when both risky assets follow
ABMs (249)–(250). From Proposition 3.1, the process for X under the measure P ∗is given
by
dXt = ( ¯m −ρ¯ν ¯µ −rSt
¯σ
)dt + ¯νdw∗
Xt.
Integrating from t to T and taking the expectation E∗
t [·] on both sides we obtain:
E∗
t [XT ] = Xt + m(T −t) −ρ¯ν ¯µ(T −t) −St(er(T−t) −1)
¯σ
.
Substituting this into Proposition 3.1 yields the optimal hedge reported in Table 3.1. Since
X and S follow ABMs, cov0(XT , ST ) = ρ¯ν¯σT and var0(ST ) = ¯σ2T. Substituting these into
θstatic
t
in (247), we obtain the static hedge, which coincides with the dynamic one, and hence
∆t = 0.
When the risky asset prices follow GBMs (241)–(242), the dynamically optimal hedge
and its corresponding hedging error variance are given by (243) and (280), respectively. The
static hedge reported in Table 3.1 is obtained from (247) by observing that since X2
t , S2
t
and XtSt follow GBMs,
vart[XT ]
=
Xte2m(T−t)(eν2(T−t) −1),
vart[ST ] = Ste2µ(T−t)(eσ2(T−t) −1), (286)
covt(XT , ST )
=
XtSte2(m+µ)(T−t)(eρνσ(T−t) −1).
(287)
160


=== PDF PAGE 162 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Substituting W static
T
from the static budget constraint (246) into the hedging error vari-
ance we obtain
vart[XT −W static
T
] = vart[XT ] −2θstatic
0
S0
covt(XT , ST ) +
θstatic
0
S0
2
vart[ST ].
(288)
We now show that for ρ > 0 the performance measure (240) is positive in this GBMs
case. We note that the static hedging error variance (288) is a quadratic function of θ0, the
minimization of which along with the expressions (286)–(287) gives the lower bound for the
static hedging error variance:
vart[XT −W static
T
] ≥X2
t e2m(T−t)
 
eν2(T−t) −1 −(eρνσ(T−t) −1)2
eσ2(T−t) −1
!
.
(289)
We next rewrite the dynamically optimal hedging error variance (280) in integral form and
ﬁnd its upper bound for ρ > 0 as:
vart[XT −W ∗
T ]
=
X2
t (1 −ρ2)ν2e2m(T−t)
Z T
t
e−2ρν µ−r
σ (T−s)eν2(s−t)ds
(290)
≤
X2
t (1 −ρ2)ν2e2m(T−t)
Z T
t
eν2(s−t)ds = X2
t (1 −ρ2)e2m(T−t)(eν2(T−t) −1).
A suﬃcient condition for the dynamically optimal variance to be lower than the static one
is that the upper bound in (290) is below the lower bound in (289), which is equivalent to
eρνσ(T−t) −1
ρνσ
2
≤
eσ2(T−t) −1
σ2
eν2(T−t) −1
ν2

.
(291)
To show that inequality holds, we rewrite its left-hand side as a squared integral, estimate
it from above and then apply the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality:
Z T
t
eρνσ(T−s)ds
2
≤
Z T
t
e( ν2
2 + σ2
2 )(T−s)ds
2
≤
Z T
t
eσ2(T−s)ds
Z T
t
eν2(T−s)ds

.
(292)
Computing the integrals in (292) we obtain inequality (291), and hence ∆t > 0.
For ρ < 0 in the case of GBMs, we demonstrate that θ∗
t still outperforms after a certain
period of time ¯t. Substituting the dynamically optimal and static hedging error variances,
(280) and (288), into the performance measure (240), and taking limit as t goes to T we
obtain:
∆T =
E0[ν2X2
T −2ρνσXT ST
θstatic
0
S0
+ σ2S2
T (θstatic
0
S0
)2]
(1 −ρ2)ν2E0[X2
T ]
−1 ≡
E0[(ρνXT −ST
θstatic
0
S0
)2]
(1 −ρ2)ν2E0[X2
T ]
.
161


=== PDF PAGE 163 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
Since ∆T > 0 there exists ¯t such that ∆t > 0 whenever t > ¯t. For some parameter values of
ρ, σ, ν and T, the performance measure ∆t can become negative but only for implausibly
large (µ −r)/σ.48
The remainder of the results for the case when the asset X follows an OU process and the
stock S follows either an ABM or a GBM can be obtained along the lines of above. First,
we compute the optimal hedges and corresponding hedging error variances by applying
Proposition 3.1. Then, we characterize the static hedges by computing relevant moments
for the processes Xt, St and XtSt. Finally, we obtain a lower bound for the static hedging
error variance as above, and compare it with the dynamically optimal one or its upper
bound.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3.5.
The dynamically optimal hedges reported in Table 3.2 are
the same as in Table 3.1, while the myopic hedges are immediate from the expression (253).
Thus, it remains to compare the relative performances.
When the risky assets follow ABMs, the two hedges coincide and hence ∆t = 0. Turning
to the case when both X and S follow GBMs, we derive the myopic hedging error variance
using the expanded law of total variance (276) and compare it with the dynamically optimal
one. From the budget constraint in integral form (264) and the expression for the myopic
hedge we obtain:
Et[XT −W myopic
T
] = Xtem(T−t)
1 −ρν µ −r
σ
Z T
t
e−(m−r)(T−s)ds

−Wter(T−t).
Applying Itˆo’s lemma, we derive dEt[XT −W myopic
T
], substitute it into the law of total
variance (276), and after some algebra determine the myopic hedging error variance:
vart[XT −W myopic
T
]
=
X2
t ν2e2m(T−t)
Z T
t
eν2(s−t)
(1 −ρ2)

1 −ρν µ −r
σ
1 −e−(m−r)(T−s)
m −r
2
+
ρ2ν2m −r
ν
−ρµ −r
σ
21 −e−(m−r)(T−s)
m −r
2
ds.
(293)
48For example, if ρ = −0.2, ν = 0.36, σ = 0.16 and T = 1, the static policy outperforms at time 0 only for
(µ −r)/σ > 0.6. If the parameter ρ increases in absolute value, the lower boundary for the market price of
risk also increases.
162


=== PDF PAGE 164 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
We now show that if (m −r)/ν > ρ(µ −r)/σ, the dynamically optimal hedge outperforms
the myopic one. Comparing the dynamically optimal and myopic hedging error variances
given by (290) and (293) we observe that a suﬃcient condition for the dynamically optimal
hedge to outperform the myopic one is
1 −ρν µ −r
σ
1 −e−(m−r)(T−t)
m −r
> e−ρν µ−r
σ (T−t).
This inequality can equivalently be rewritten as
Z T
t
e−ρν µ−r
σ (T−s)ds ≥
Z T
t
e−(m−r)(T−s)ds,
which holds whenever condition (m −r)/ν > ρ(µ −r)/σ is satisﬁed. If this condition is
violated, the dynamically optimal hedge can outperform or underperform.
The remainder of the relative performance results for the case when the asset X follows an
OU process while the stock S is an ABM or a GBM are obtained similarly. The dynamically
optimal and myopic hedging error variances are obtained from the expressions (221) and
(276).
It is then directly observed that the myopic hedging error variance exceeds the
dynamically optimal one for all parameters, and hence ∆t > 0.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3.6.
The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 3.1. The
hedging problem is solved via dynamic programming and the value function is deﬁned as:
J(Xt, St, Wt, t) = Et[XT −W ∗
T ] −γ
2 vart[XT −W ∗
T ].
(294)
Applying the law of total variance along the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 3.1,
we obtain an HJB equation. To solve this equation, substituting the budget constraint in
integral form (264) into the hedger’s objective (254), we show that the objective is linear in
Wt and hence θ∗
t and Gt do not depend on Wt. In contrast to the minimum-variance case,
the value function linearly depends on Wter(T−t) and can be represented as:
J(Xt, St, Wt, t) = Wter(T−t) + ˆJ(Xt, St, t).
Applying Itˆo’s lemma to the processes ˆJt, Gt and Wter(T−t) we obtain a PDE for the value
function and the optimal hedge in a recursive form. The optimal hedge in terms of exogenous
163


=== PDF PAGE 165 ===
Chapter 3: Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution
parameters is then obtained by applying the Feynman-Kac theorem, as in Proposition 3.1.
Solving the PDE for Jt, we obtain the value function (256).
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3.7.
Proposition 3.7 is a multidimensional version of Proposition
3.1 and can be proven along the same lines. Fist, using the law of total variance, we derive an
HJB equation and then the optimal hedge in a recursive form. Then, applying the Feynman-
Kac theorem we ﬁnd the optimal hedge in terms of exogenous parameters. Finally, solving
the HJB PDE for the value function, we obtain the hedging error variance in closed form.
Q.E.D.
164


=== PDF PAGE 166 ===
References
References
Acharya, V.V., and L.H. Pedersen, 2005, “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 77, 375-410.
Adler, M., and J.B. Detemple, 1988, “On the Optimal Hedge of a Nontraded Cash Posi-
tion,” Journal of Finance, 43, 143-153.
Ait-Sahalia, Y., and M.W. Brandt, 2001, “Variable Selection for Portfolio Choice,” Journal
of Finance, 56, 1297-1351.
Anderson, R.W., and J.-P. Danthine, 1980, “Hedging and Joint Production: Theory and
Illustrations,” Journal of Finance, 35, 487-498.
Anderson, R.W., and J.-P. Danthine, 1981, “Cross Hedging,” Journal of Political Economy,
89, 1182-1196.
Anderson, R.W., and J.-P. Danthine, 1983, “The Time Pattern of Hedging and the Volatil-
ity of Futures Prices,” Review of Economic Studies, 50, 249-266.
Bajeux-Besnainou, I., and R. Portait, 1998, “Dynamic Asset Allocation in a Mean-Variance
Framework,” Management Science, 44, 79-95.
Bansal, R., M. Dahlquist, and C.R. Harvey, 2004, “Dynamic Trading Strategies and Port-
folio Choice,” Working Paper, Duke University.
Bansal, R., and D. Kiku, 2007, “Cointegration and Long-Run Asset Allocation,” Working
Paper, Duke University.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron, 2004, “Risk for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59, 1481-1509.
Barberis, N., 2000, “Investing for the Long Run When Returns Are Predictable,” Journal
of Finance, 55, 225-264.
Basak, S., 2000, “A Model of Dynamic Equilibrium Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous
Beliefs and Extraneous Risk,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 24, 63-95.
165


=== PDF PAGE 167 ===
References
Basak, S., 2005, “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Beliefs,” Journal of Banking and Fi-
nance, 29, 2849-2881.
Basak, S., and B. Croitoru, 2000, “Equilibrium Mispricing in a Capital Market with Port-
folio Constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 715-748.
Basak, S., and B. Croitoru, 2006, “On the Role of Arbitrageurs in Rational Markets,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 81, 143-173.
Basak, S., and D. Cuoco, 1998, “An Equilibrium Model with Restricted Stock Market
Participation,” Review of Financial Studies, 11, 309-341.
Beckers, S., 1980, “The Constant Elasticity of Variance Model and Its Implications for
Option Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 35, 661-673.
Berrada, T., 2009, “Bounded Rationality and Asset Pricing with Intermediate Consump-
tion,” Review of Finance, forthcoming.
Bertsimas, D., L. Kogan, and A. Lo, 2001, “Hedging Derivative Securities and Incomplete
Markets: An ϵ−Arbitrage Approach,” Operations Research, 49, 372-397.
Bhamra, H.S., 2007, “Stock Market Liberalization and the Cost of Capital in Emerging
Markets,” Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
Bhamra, H.S., and R. Uppal, 2009, “The Eﬀect of Introducing a Non-Redundant Derivative
on the Volatility of Stock-Market Returns When Agents Diﬀer in Risk Aversion,”
Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2303-2330.
Bielecki, T.R., M. Jeanblanc, and M. Rutkowski, 2004, “Mean-Variance Hedging of De-
faultable Claims,” Working Paper, Illinois Institute of Technology.
Bielecki, T., H. Jin, S.R. Pliska, and X.Y. Zhou, 2005, “Continuous-Time Mean-Variance
Portfolio Selection with Bankruptcy Prohibition,” Mathematical Finance, 15, 213-244.
Black, F., 1976, “The Pricing of Commodity Contracts,” Journal of Financial Economics,
3, 167-179.
Bossaerts, P., K. Preuschoﬀ, and S.R. Quartz, 2006, “Neural Diﬀerentiation of Expected
Reward and Risk in Human Subcortical Structures,” Neuron, 51, 381-390.
166


=== PDF PAGE 168 ===
References
Bossaerts, P., K. Preuschoﬀ, and S.R. Quartz, 2008, “Markowitz in the Brain?” Revue
d’Economie Politique, forthcoming.
Brandt, M.W., 1999, “Estimating Portfolio and Consumption Choice: A Conditional Euler
Equations Approach,” Journal of Finance, 54, 1609-1645.
Brandt, M.W., 2003, “Hedging Demands in Hedging Contingent Claims,” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics, 85, 119-140.
Brandt, M.W., 2009, “Portfolio Choice Problems,” in Ait-Sahalia, Y., and L.P. Hansen
(eds.), Handbook of Financial Econometrics.
Brandt, M.W., A. Goyal, P. Santa-Clara, and J.R. Stroud, 2005, “A Simulation Approach
to Dynamic Portfolio Choice with an Application to Learning About Predictability,”
Review of Financial Studies, 18, 831-873.
Brandt, M.W., and P. Santa-Clara, 2006, “Dynamic Portfolio Selection by Augmenting
the Asset Space,” Journal of Finance, 61, 2187-2218.
Breeden, D.T., 1984, “Futures Markets and Commodity Options: Hedging and Optimality
in Incomplete markets,” Journal of Economic Theory, 32, 275-300.
Brennan, M.J., and Y. Xia, 2002, “Dynamic Asset Allocation under Inﬂation,” Journal of
Finance, 57, 1201-1238.
Brooks, C., O.T. Henry, and G. Persand, 2002, “The Eﬀect of Asymmetries on Optimal
Hedge Ratios,” Journal of Business, 75, 333-352.
Campbell, J.Y., 2003, “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” Handbook of Economics and
Finance, G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz (eds.), North Holland, Amster-
dam.
Campbell, J.Y., 2006, “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance, 61, 1553-1604.
Campbell, J.Y., and J.H. Cochrane, 1999, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
107, 205-251.
167


=== PDF PAGE 169 ===
References
Campbell, J.Y., K. Serfaty-de Medeiros, and L.M. Viceira, 2009, ”Global Currency Hedg-
ing,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Campbell, J.Y., and L.M. Viceira, 1999, “Consumption and Portfolio Decisions when Ex-
pected Returns are Time Varying,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 433-495.
Campbell, J.Y., and L.M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for
Long-Term Investors, Oxford University Press.
Caplin, A., and J. Leahy, 2006, “The Recursive Approach to Time Inconsistency,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 131, 134-156.
Chacko, G., and L.M. Viceira, 2005, “Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with
Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 18, 1369-
1402.
Chan, L.K.C., J. Karceski, and J. Lakonishok, 1999, “On Portfolio Optimization: Fore-
casting Covariances and Choosing the Risk Model,” Review of Financial Studies, 12,
937-974.
Chan, Y.L., and L. Kogan, 2002, “Catching Up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous Prefer-
ences and the Dynamics of Asset Pries,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1255-1285.
Chien, Y., H. Cole, and H. Lustig, 2008, “A Multiplier Approach to Understanding the
Macro Implications of Household Finance,” Working Paper, Purdue University.
Cochrane, J.H., 2008, “A Mean Variance Benchmark for Intertemporal Portfolio Theory,”
Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Cogley, T., and T.J. Sargent, 2008, “The Market Price of Risk and the Equity Premium:
A Legacy of the Great Depression?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 454-476.
Cornell, B., and R. Roll, 2005, “A Delegated-Agent Asset-Pricing Model,” Financial An-
alysts Journal, 61, 57-69.
Costa, O.L.V., and A.C. Paiva, 2002, “Robust Portfolio Selection Using Linear-Matrix
Inequalities,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 26, 889-909.
168


=== PDF PAGE 170 ===
References
Cox, J.C., 1996, “The Constant Elasticity of Variance Option Pricing Model,” Journal of
Portfolio Management, 22, 15-17.
Cox, J.C., and C.-F. Huang, 1989, “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies when
Asset Prices follow a Diﬀusion Process,” Journal of Economic Theory, 39, 33-83.
Cox, J.C., J. Ingersoll, and S. Ross, 1985, “A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates,” Econometrica, 53, 385-408.
Cox, J.C., and S.A. Ross, 1976, “The Valuation of Options for Alternative Stochastic
Processes,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 145-166.
Cuoco, D., 1997, “Optimal Consumption and Equilibrium Prices with Portfolio Constraints
and Stochastic Income,” Journal of Economic Theory, 72, 33-73.
Cuoco, D., and H. He, 2001, “Dynamic Aggregation and Computation of Equilibria in
Finite-Dimensional Economies with Incomplete Markets,” Annals of Economics and
Finance, 2, 265-296.
Cvitanic, J., L. Goukasian, and F. Zapatero, 2003, “Monte Carlo Computation of Optimal
Portfolios in Complete Markets,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 27,
971-986.
Cvitanic, J., and I. Karatzas, 1992, “Convex Duality in Constrained Optimization,” Annals
of Applied Probability, 2, 767-818.
Cvitanic, J., A. Lazrak, and T. Wang, 2008, “Implications of the Sharpe Ratio as a Perfor-
mance Measure in Multi-Period Settings,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con-
trol, 32, 1622-1649.
Cvitanic, J., and F. Zapatero, 2004, Introduction to the Economics and Mathematics of
Financial Markets, The MIT Press.
Detemple, J.B., R. Garcia, and M. Rindisbacher, 2003, “A Monte Carlo Method for Opti-
mal Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, 58, 401-446.
Detemple, J., and S. Murthy, 1997, “Equilibrium Asset Prices and No-Arbitrage with
Portfolio Constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, 10, 1133-1174.
169


=== PDF PAGE 171 ===
References
Dixit, R.K., and R.S. Pindyck, 1994, Investment under Uncertainty, Princeton University
Press.
Duﬃe, D., 1989, Futures Markets, Prentice Hall.
Duﬃe, D., W. Fleming, H.M. Soner, and T. Zariphopoulou, 1997, “Hedging in Incomplete
Markets with HARA Utility,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21, 753-
782.
Duﬃe, D., and M.O. Jackson, 1989, “Optimal Innovation of Futures Contracts,” Review
of Financial Studies, 2, 275-296.
Duﬃe, D., and M.O. Jackson, 1990, “Optimal Hedging and Equilibrium in a Dynamic
Futures Market,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 14, 21-33.
Duﬃe, D., and H.R. Richardson, 1991, “Mean-Variance Hedging in Continuous Time,”
Annals of Applied Probability, 1, 1-15.
Duﬃe, D., and L. Epstein, 1992, “Stochastic Diﬀerential Utility,” Econometrica, 60, 353-
394.
Dumas, B., 1989, “Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium in the Capital Market,” Review of
Financial Studies, 2, 157-188.
Dumas, B., A. Kurshev, and R. Uppal, 2009, “Equilibrium Portfolio Strategies in the
Presence of Sentiment Risk and Excess Volatility,” Journal of Finance, 64, 579-629.
Dumas, B., and A. Lyasoﬀ, 2008, “Incomplete market Equilibria Solved Recursively on an
Event Tree,” Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.
Dumas, B., and P. Maenhout, 2002, “A Central-Planning Approach to Dynamic Incomplete-
Market Equilibrium,” Working Paper, INSEAD.
Ederington, L.H., 1979, “The Hedging Performance of the New Futures Markets,” Journal
of Finance, 34, 157-170.
Ekeland, I., and A. Lazrak, 2008, “Equilibrium Policies when Preferences are Time Incon-
sistent,” Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
170


=== PDF PAGE 172 ===
References
Ferson, W.E, and C.R. Harvey, 1991, “The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums,” Journal
of Political Economy, 99, 385-415.
Figlewski, S., 1984, “Hedging Performance and Basis Risk in Stock Index Futures,” Journal
of Finance, 39, 657-669.
Follmer, H., and M. Schweizer, 1991, “Hedging Contingent Claims under Incomplete In-
formation,” in Davis, M.H.A., and R.J. Elliott (eds.) Applied Stochastic Analysis,
Gordon and Breach, 389-414.
Follmer, H., and D. Sondermann, 1986, “Hedging of Non-Redundant Contingent Claims,”
in Hildenbrand, W., and A. Mas-Colell (eds.), Contributions to Mathematical Eco-
nomics, 205-233.
Follmer, H., and D. Sondermann, 1986, “Hedging of Non-Redundant Contingent Claims,”
in Hildenbrand, W., and A. Mas-Colell (eds.), Contributions to Mathematical Eco-
nomics, 205-233.
Gallmeyer, M., and B. Holliﬁeld, 2008, “An Examination of Heterogeneous Beliefs with a
Short-Sale Constraint in a Dynamic Equilibrium,” Review of Finance, 12, 323-364.
Gibson, R., and E.S. Schwartz, 1990, “Stochastic Convenience Yield and the Pricing of Oil
Contingent Claims,” Journal of Finance, 45, 959-976.
Gomes, F., and A. Michaelides, 2008, “Asset Pricing with Limited Risk Sharing and Het-
erogeneous Agents,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 416-448.
Gomez, J.-P., and F. Zapatero, 2003, “Asset Pricing Implications of Benchmarking: a
Two-Factor CAPM,” European Journal of Finance, 9, 343-357.
Gourieroux C., L.P. Laurent, and H. Pham, 1998, “Mean-Variance Hedging and Nu-
meraire,” Mathematical Finance, 8, 179-200.
Grenadier, S.R., and N. Wang, 2007, “Investment under Uncertainty and Time-Inconsistent
Preferences,” Journal of Financial Economics, 84, 2-39.
Guvenen, F., 2006, “Reconciling Conﬂicting Evidence on the Elasticity of Intertemporal
Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53,
171


=== PDF PAGE 173 ===
References
1451-1472.
Harris, C., and D. Laibson, 2001, “Dynamic Choices of Hyperbolic Consumers,” Econo-
metrica, 69, 935-957.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2008, “Intermediary Asset Prices,” Working Paper, North-
western University.
Henderson, V., 2005, “Explicit Solutions to an Optimal Portfolio Choice Problem with
Stochastic Income,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 29, 1237-1266.
Heston, S.L., 1993, “A Closed-Form Solution for Options with Stochastic Volatility with
Applications to Bond and Currency Options,” Review of Financial Studies, 6, 327-343.
Hirshleifer, D., 1988, “Residual Risk, trading Costs, and Commodity Futures Risk Premia,”
Review of Financial Studies, 1, 173-193.
Hong, H., J.D. Kubik, and J.C. Stein, 2004, “Social Interaction and Stock Market Partic-
ipation,” Journal of Finance, 59, 137-163.
Hong, H., J. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong, 2006, “Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles,”
Journal of Finance, 61, 1073-1117.
Huang, L., and H. Liu, 2007, “Rational Inattention and Portfolio Selection,” Journal of
Finance, 62, 1999-2040.
Huang, C.-F., and H. Pages, 1992, “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies with an
Inﬁnite Horizon: Existence and Convergence,” Annals of Applied Probability, 2, 36-64.
Hugonnier, J., 2008, “Bubbles and Multiplicity of Equilibria under Portfolio Constraints,”
Working Paper, University of Lausanne.
Hull, J.C., 2008, Options, Futures and Other Derivatives, Seventh Edition, Prentice Hall.
In, F., and S. Kim, 2006, “The Hedge Ratio and the Empirical Relationship between the
Stock and Futures Markets,” Journal of Business, 79, 799-820.
Jagannathan, R., and T. Ma, 2003, “Risk Reduction in Large Portfolios: Why Imposing
the Wrong Constraint Helps,” Journal of Finance, 58, 1651-1683.
172


=== PDF PAGE 174 ===
References
Jaillet, P., E.I. Ronn, and S. Tompaidis, 2004, “Valuation of Commodity-Based Swing
Options,” Management Science, 50, 909-921.
Jarrow, R., 1980, “Heterogeneous Expectations, Restrictions on Short Sales, and Equilib-
rium Asset Prices,” Journal of Finance, 25, 1105-1113.
Johnsen, T.H., and J.B. Donaldson, 1985, “The Structure of Intertemporal Preferences
under Uncertainty and Time Consistent Plans,” Econometrica, 53, 1451-1458.
Jorion, F., 2003, “Portfolio Optimization with Tracking-Error Constraints,” Financial An-
alysts Journal, 59, 70-82.
Kamara, A., and A.F. Siegel, 1987, “Optimal Hedging in Futures Markets with Multiple
Delivery Speciﬁcation,” Journal of Finance, 42, 1007-1021.
Karatzas, I., J.P. Lehoczky, and S.E. Shreve, 1987, “Optimal Portfolio and Consumption
Decisions for a Small Investor on a Finite Horizon,” SIAM Journal of Control and
Optimization, 25, 1557-1586.
Karatzas, I., and S.E. Shreve, 1991, Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus, Springer-
Verlag, New York.
Karatzas, I., and S.E. Shreve, 1998, Methods of Mathematical Finance, Springer-Verlag,
New York.
Kerkvliet, J., and M.H. Moﬀett, 1991, “The Hedging of an Uncertain Future Foreign
Currency Cash Flow,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 26, 565-578.
Kihlstrom, R., 2008, “Risk Aversion and the Elasticity of Substitution in General Dy-
namic Portfolio Theory: Consistent Planning by Forward Looking, Expected Utility
Maximizing Investor,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, forthcoming.
Kim, T.S., and E. Omberg, 1996, “Dynamic Nonmyopic Portfolio Behavior,” Review of
Financial Studies, 9, 141-161.
Kogan, L., I. Makarov, and R. Uppal, 2007, “The Equity Premium and the Riskfree Rate
in an Economy with Borrowing Constraints,” Mathematics and Financial Economics,
1, 1-19.
173


=== PDF PAGE 175 ===
References
Kogan, L., S.A. Ross, J. Wang, and M.M. Westerﬁeld, “The Price Impact and Survival of
Irrational Traders,” Journal of Finance, 61, 195-229.
Korn, R., and H. Kraft, 2004, “On the Stability of Continuous-Time Portfolio Problems
with Stochastic Opportunity Sets,” Mathematical Finance, 14, 403-414.
Kroner, K.F., and J. Sultan, 1993, “Time-Varying Distributions and Dynamic Hedging
with Foreign Currency Futures,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 28,
535-551.
Leippold, M., F. Trojani, and P. Vanini, 2004, “Geometric Approach to Multiperiod Mean-
Variance Optimization of Assets and Liabilities,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 28, 1079-1113.
Li, D., and W.L. Ng, 2000, “Optimal Dynamic Portfolio Selection: Multiperiod Mean-
Variance Formulation,” Mathematical Finance, 10, 387-406.
Lim, A.E.B., and X.Y. Zhou, 2002, “Mean-Variance Portfolio Selection with Random Pa-
rameters in a Complete Market,” Mathematics of Operations Research, 27, 101-120.
Lioui, A., and P. Poncet, 2000, “The Minimum Variance Hedge Ratio Under Stochastic
Interest Rates,” Management Science, 46, 658-668.
Liu, J., 2001, “Dynamic Portfolio Choice and Risk Aversion,” Working Paper, UCLA.
Liu, J., 2007, “Portfolio Selection in Stochastic Environments,” Review of Financial Stud-
ies, 20, 1-39.
Ljungqvist, L., and T.J. Sargent, 2004, Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, MIT Press.
Longstaﬀ, F.A., 2009, “Asset Pricing in Markets with Illiquid Assets,” American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Maenhout, P., 2006, “Robust Portfolio Rules and Detection-Error Probabilities for a Mean-
Reverting Risk Premium,” Journal of Economic Theory, 128, 136-163.
Malloy, C.J., T.J. Moskowitz, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009, “Long-Run Stockholder
Consumption Risk and Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
174


=== PDF PAGE 176 ===
References
Mankiw, N.G., and S.P. Zeldes, 1991, “The Consumption of Stockholders and Non-stockholders,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 97-112.
Markowitz, H.M., 1952, “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, 7, 77-91.
McDonald, R., 2006, Derivatives Markets, Second Edition, Addison Wesley.
Mehra, R., and E.C. Prescott, 1985, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Mone-
tary Economics, 15, 145-161.
Merton, R.C., 1971, “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-Time
Model,” Journal of Economic Theory, 3, 373-413.
Miyahara, Y., 1996, “Canonical Martingale Measures of Incomplete Assets Markets,” in
Watanabe, S., M. Fukushima, Yu. V. Prohorov, and A.M. Shiryaev (eds.), Proba-
bility Theory and Mathematical Statistics: Proceedings of the Seventh Japan-Russian
Symposium, 343-352.
Musiela, M., and M. Rutkowski, 1998, Martingale Methods in Financial Modelling, Springer-
Verlag.
Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon, 2008, “The Role of Portfolio Constraints in the International
Propagation of Shocks,” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 1215-1256.
Peleg, B., and M.E. Yaari, 1973, “On the Existence of Consistent Course of Action when
Tastes are Changing,” Review of Economic Studies, 40, 391-401.
Pham, H., T. Rheinlander, and M. Schweizer, 1998, “Mean-Variance Hedging for Contin-
uous Processes: New Proofs and Examples,” Finance and Stochastics, 2, 173-198.
Pindyck, R.S., 2004, “Volatility and Commodity Price Dynamics,” Journal of Futures
Markets, 24, 1029-1047.
Rolfo, J., 1980, “Optimal Hedging under Price and Quantity Uncertainty: The Case of a
Cocoa Producer,” Journal of Political Economy, 88, 100-116.
Roll, R., 1992, “A Mean-Variance Analysis of Tracking Error,” Journal of Portfolio Man-
agement, 18, 13-23.
175


=== PDF PAGE 177 ===
References
Samuelson, W., and R. Zeckhouser, 1988, “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making,” Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 1, 7-59.
Sangvinatsos, A., and J.A. Wachter, 2005, “Does the Failure of the Expectations Hypoth-
esis Matter for Long-Term Investors?” Journal of Finance, 60, 179-230.
Schornick, A.V., 2009, “Competing Capital Constraints,” Working Paper, INSEAD.
Schroder, M., 1989, “Computing the Constant Elasticity of Variance Option Pricing For-
mula,” Journal of Finance, 44, 211-219.
Schwartz, E.S., 1997, “The Stochastic Behavior of Commodity Prices: Implications for
Valuation and Hedging,” Journal of Finance, 52, 923-973.
Schwartz, E.S., and J.E. Smith, 2000, “Short-Term Variations and Long-Term Dynamics
in Commodity Prices,” Management Science, 46, 893-911.
Schweizer, M., 1992, “Mean-Variance Hedging for General Claims,” Annals of Probability,
2, 171-179.
Schweizer, M., 1994, “Approximating Random Variables by Stochastic Integrals,” Annals
of Probability, 22, 1536-1575.
Schweizer, M., 1999, “A Minimality Property of the Minimal Martingale Measure,” Statis-
tics and Probability Letters, 42, 27-31.
Schweizer, M., 2001, “A Guided Tour through Quadratic Hedging Approaches,” in Jouini,
J., J. Cvitanic, and M. Musiela (eds.), Option Pricing, Interest Rates and Risk Man-
agement, Cambridge University Press, 538-574.
Schwert, W., 1989, “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?” Journal of
Finance, 44, 1115-1153.
Siegel, D.R., and D.F. Siegel, 1990, The Futures Markets: Arbitrage, Risk Management
and Portfolio Choice, McGraw Hill.
Srinivas, P.S., E. Whitehouse, and J. Yermo, 2000, “Regulating Private Pension Funds’
Structure, Performance and Investments: Cross-Country Evidence,” Working Paper,
World Bank.
176


=== PDF PAGE 178 ===
References
Strotz, R.H., 1956, “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review
of Economic Studies, 23, 165-180.
Stulz, R.M., 1984, “Optimal Hedging Policies,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 19, 127-140.
Stulz, R.M., 2003, Risk Management and Derivatives, First Edition, South Western College
Publishing.
Svensson, L.E.O, and I.M. Werner, 1993, “Nontraded Assets in Incomplete Markets: Pric-
ing and Portfolio Choice,” European Economic Review, 37, 1149-1168.
Tepla, L., 2000a, “Optimal Portfolio Policies with Borrowing and Shortsale Constraints,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 24, 1623-1639.
Tepla, L., 2000b, “Optimal Hedging and Valuation of Non-traded Assets,” European Eco-
nomic Review, 4, 231-251.
Vasicek, O., 1977, “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 5, 177-188.
Viceira, L.M., 2001, “Optimal Portfolio Choice for Long-Horizon Investors with Nontrad-
able Labor Income,” Journal of Finance, 56, 433-470.
Wachter, J.A., 2002, “Portfolio and Consumption Decisions under Mean-Reverting Re-
turns: An Explicit Solution for Complete Market,” Journal of Financial and Quanti-
tative Analysis, 37, 63-91.
Wang, J., 1996, “The Term Structure of Interest rates in a Pure Exchange Economy with
Heterogeneous Investors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 41, 75-110.
Weiss, N., 2005, A Course in Probability, Addison-Wesley.
Wu, T., 2008, “An Equilibrium Model with Buy and Hold Investors”, Working Paper,
Illinois Institute of Technology.
Yan, H., 2008, “Natural Selection in Financial Markets: Does it Work?” Management
Science, 54, 1935-1950.
177


=== PDF PAGE 179 ===
References
Zhao, Y., and W.T. Ziemba, 2002, “Mean-Variance versus Expected Utility in Dynamic
Investment Analysis,” Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
Zhou, X.Y., and D. Li, 2000, “Continuous-Time Mean-Variance Portfolio Selection: A
Stochastic LQ Framework,” Applied Mathematics and Optimization 42, 19-53.
178
